 23K284 School Name: THE GREGORY JOCKO JACKSON SCHOOL OF SPORTS, ART, AND TECHNOLOGY Principal: KEVA PITTS 2018-19 RSCEP-R 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Gregory “Jocko” Jackson 33200010284 3-K through 5th Grade School Number (DBN): 23K284 213 Osborn Street, Brooklyn, New York 11212 718-495-7791 718-495-7839 Phone Number: Keva Pitts-Girard Fax: Email Address: Kpittsgirard@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Partnership With Children Keva Pitts-Girard Alexandra Teitel Dawn McDonald Ibellis Marin Angela Grant ShanellCurtis District Information Geographical District: 23 Superintendent’s Office Address: Dr. Miatheresa Pate Superintendent: 1784 Park Place Brooklyn, NY 11233 mpate@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-240-3677 Phone Number: 718-385-3768 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 3  Brooklyn North FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street Bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with 2018-19 RSCEP-R 5  the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development 2018-19 RSCEP-R 6  The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure 2018-19 RSCEP-R 7  how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 8   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT x x x x x x Name Position and Constituent Group Keva Pitts Dawn McDonald Ibellis Marin Julia McDaniel Shanell Curtis Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Alexandra Teitel, Partnership With Children Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 10  Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jacqueline Richey Angela Grant TessilHobson x x x x x Parent Parent Parent Staff Staff Staff Other Contributor Staff Staff Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor 2018-19 RSCEP-R 11  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. P.S. 284 The Gregory “Jocko” Jackson School of Sports, Arts, and Technology formerly known as The Lew Wallace School is located in the heart of Brownsville, Brooklyn. Our school is the home to approximately 290 students in grades 3K through five. According to our school’s School Quality Snapshot, 69% of the students are African-American, 29% Hispanic, and 1% Asian. We have approximately 30% of students with IEPs, 8% ELLs and 100% free lunch. Last year, 2017-2018 28% of our students met standards on the state ELA exam and 17% of students met the standards on the state mathematics exam. The mission at our school is to continue our tradition of a family-centered environment that supports a solid academic foundation, social and cultural sophistication and prepares our students for the colleges and careers of the 21 st century. We are a Community School with the lead CBO, Partnership With Children (PWC). Through PWC, we have a Community School Director on-site whose focus is on strategy and implementation around community and family engagement, attendance improvement, academic enrichment, health and wellness, and school culture. In addition, we have a PWC Social Work Director, two PWC Social Workers and two PWC interns who all work with students in individual and group counseling sessions and full class interventions. PWC also provides professional development and support for teachers as needed. Additionally, we have partnerships and initiatives with a focus on in increasing academic achievement and preparing students for college and career success. For enrichment, we are continuing to partner with 21st Century in order to offer after-school, extended day, and Saturday options, like martial arts, basketball, dance, visual art and soccer for K- 5th grade students. Through our DYCD, Brooklyn Community Services we provide afterschool homework help, enrichment curriculum and activities for our K-5 students. We are also conducting a community needs assessment in order to determine what other kinds of enrichment opportunities students and families are looking for; once this assessment is complete, we will seek out additional program partners in order to provide students and families with the services that will ensure that students are growing and learning in their classrooms. Our school has Extended Learning Time, so every student receives an additional five hours of instructional time each week. 5th grade students complete a survey on different enrichment options they would like to participate in. Based on the results students are placed in different groups. During this ELT time, students participate in a variety of academic, sports arts and enrichment activities, aimed at improving their academic performance and motivation. These activities include, Lego robotics, visual arts, yoga, and targeted small group instruction. In order to engage families, we host monthly events, including open houses, performances, holiday celebrations, community school meetings, award ceremonies, field trips and parent-teacher conferences. We will also have workshops for parents on ways they can support their child academically at home. We conduct family assessments and determine what kinds of workshops families need; once that is determined we host those workshops regularly. Topics may include computer skills, job training, financial literacy, ELL classes, parenting and continuing education. In order to ensure that our families are supported and that communication is strong, we have a team of school staff focused on this job, including our Community School Director, Parent Coordinator, Family Worker, Attendance 2018-19 RSCEP-R 12  Teacher and PWC staff. We send regular communication home to families through students’ backpacks, school website, class Dojo, social media, monthly calendars, and newsletters. At P.S. 284, we believe that students learn best when they are in an environment where they feel comfortable and are free to make mistakes. Teachers regularly conference with students in efforts to address any lingering misunderstandings allowing students opportunities to engage in self and peer assessments and utilize rubrics and checklists to evaluate their work in alignment to the standards. As a school, we pride ourselves on using a variety of strategies to ensure that all students are able to contribute to the lessons. The teacher use a variety of multiple entry points to meet the needs of all learners. Through the use of technology, manipulatives, and engaging tasks, we are able to motivate and educate our students. Students are also beginning to expand their learning and understanding through the use of questioning and discussion.The teachers model and scaffold the lesson to support learning. Additionally, the teacher provide explicit instruction to students then gradual release responsibility to students. The arts are also utilized in all of our classrooms to enhance student achievement. At P.S. 284, we have special populations such as Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners, and students in temporary housing. All of the above mentioned students have specific needs that we have to address daily. Our SWDs, ELLs, and overage students require more support than other students. Some of their academic needs require small settings, more explicit instruction, additional services and differentiated instruction. Our students in temporary housing have different needs such as uniforms, school supplies, and social-emotional support. Over the past year, we have made progress in all of the elements of the framework according to the results of our annual school survey. For the past three years, family engagement has risen based on the New York City Survey and attendance logs. Every year, we establish different ways to bring the community into the school. As a community school, we work with over 20 partners, including local CBO's, government officials, and corporations. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 23K284 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 474 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 84 86 14 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 69 67 14 14 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 94.0% % Attendance Rate 92.8% % Reduced Lunch 9.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 32.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.36 0% 15% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 25.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 72% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 19 19 14 89.8% 0.0% 27.0% 66.2% 0.0% 0.4% 4 21% 7.4 17.1% 14% N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-R 14  2018-19 RSCEP-R 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths (2017 - 2018 Quality Review) (1.1) Curriculum: Every student across the grades has access to a Common Core aligned curriculum in math and ELA. (3.4) High Expectations: School Leaders consistently communicate the importance and use of anchor charts as high expectations throughout the school. (4.2) Teacher Teams: Teachers collaborate in structured inquiry-based teams, and distributed leadership structures are in place. Needs (2017-2018 Quality Review) (1.2) Pedagogy: Teaching strategies across classrooms do not consistently provide students with multiple entry points. (2.2) Assessment: Student understanding of rubrics to assess their work is uneven across classrooms. 2018 IIT Recommendation: Teachers should adapt lessons using data to inform the selection of materials, activities and work products, and ensure support for students at all levels. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction 2018-19 RSCEP-R 16  What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? Our 2018-2019 school instructional focus is on assessment, which is Danielson Framework 3D. The vision will be promoted by providing ongoing professional development, inter-visitations, Teacher Team meetings, focused on looking at student work and adjusting practice, analyzing data from school-wide assessments, and progress monitoring. The teacher’s will be implementing Fundation phonics program in grades K-2 and ReadyGen in Kindergarten through fifth grade. Teachers College Writing and GoMath will be implemented in all grades. To ensure that the instructional shifts are evident in the classroom, teachers are asked to add the instructional shifts to the lesson plans in addition to observing the shifts during classroom observations. The teachers will use the Danielson Framework to assist them in writing engaging lessons that address the needs of all of their students. In an effort to build on the students’ reading levels, we are expanding classroom libraries to include a wider variety of genres and levels on topics and theme that are of interest and relevant to the students. In addition, the students will have the opportunity to engage in independent reading for one period a day. Students are also increasing their reading levels through the online reading program titled myOn and gathering their reading levels using iReady. Students will have access to computers on a daily basis to access the different programs. The Extended Learning Time will be used school-wide for small group targeted instruction. In order to ensure students are engaged in rigorous learning experiences, the school along with The Community School Director will work closely with the school principal, assistant principals, and CBOs and teachers to provide comprehensive pre-planning, to ensure learning benchmarks are achieved across the program. The Community School Director will utilize his/her expertise to increase student skill-building by making strategic decisions using student data, including assessments, and by providing teachers with resources to address student learning challenges and reinforce skills. Teachers will participate in ongoing professional development and inter-visitation. All students will engage in instruction that is both rigorous and fun. Technology will be used in most lessons through the use of videos, games, and presentations. Teachers will use various assessments to inform their whole and small group instruction. Teachers will be required to embed checks for understanding and formative assessments into their daily lessons across content areas. The various assessments include but are not limited to school-wide assessments, unit assessments, teacher created assessments, conferencing notes, quizzes and soft data such as teacher/student opinions and reflections. The data is collected by the teachers. Teachers will engage in weekly teacher team meetings and bi-monthly division wide meetings with cluster teachers. During teacher team meetings, teachers examine and analyze the data to identify the student’s strengths and weaknesses to in turn inform next instructional steps. What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? All students will receive instruction aligned to the CCLS in all subject areas. Teachers will use adaptive curriculums to deliver lessons that are not only differentiated but challenging and exciting. The programs to be implemented are ReadyGen and GoMath. Teachers will meet weekly to plan for our diverse learners by sharing best practices that they have found effective. To meet the needs of the students, the teachers will begin with a learning styles survey to identify how the students learn best. Teachers will use data from assessments and learning surveys to differentiate lessons and incorporate multiple entry points to meet the needs of all learners. Students will be provided with an opportunity to read authors from diverse cultural backgrounds through their Independent Reading period and weaved throughout the curriculum. Teachers will meet together weekly and across subject areas to discuss best practices and share activities. Teachers will also meet together to reflect and adjust the curriculum to better suit student's needs. Teachers will collect 2018-19 RSCEP-R 17  and use data form the implementation of the curricula to better differentiate lessons. In addition, teachers will get to know their students by having conversations with them and possibly with their parents/guardians to get a better understanding of the child. Parents will also be given a list of skills and strategies that they can use to assist their child at home. What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? Our vision is to be able to provide students with courses, instructional materials and technology that will ensure that they are prepared for college and beyond. This would mean providing them with class sets of chrome books for each grade that allows students to use the programs and conduct research for their assignments. This includes projects, assignments, and activities assigned by the teachers that align to the curriculum instructional units. The online reading programs and a period of independent reading each day will assist the students in building reading stamina and serve as a form of assessment for teachers to inform the instructional practices. Teachers will introduce writing rubrics and checklists, then students will be encouraged to use them to take ownership of their writing progress. Students will also engage in i-Ready, which is an adaptive, online tool which supports ELA and Math development. We also continually add books into our classroom libraries to provide additional reading materials tailored to the varying reading levels in the class. The instructional shifts will be reflected in ELA via text-based evidence as a lesson plan requirement, and a daily focus on Math fluency via routines. What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? We envision teachers using the Danielson Framework to design coherent instruction using the workshop model for all students. Teachers will plan with the end in mind using effective/highly effective instructional materials and resources; such as technology, videos, anchor charts, graphic organizers and other learning aids. Lessons will be scaffolded and differentiated in order to meet the needs of all students. This includes on-going formative and summative assessments to guide instruction. Teachers will also incorporate technology daily. Teachers will include students in the lesson by developing engaging questions and discussions. The Danielson Framework will be used as a tool to evaluate teacher's practice. This includes Domain 1e which is Designing Coherent Instruction, 3b using Questioning and Discussion Techniques, 3c Engaging Students in Learning, and 3d Using Assessment in Instruction. How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? Teachers will plan with the students needs and the end in mind. Teachers will use various scaffolds and plan tiered activities to assist students in reaching the end goal. Teachers will infuse technology which will include pictures (visuals) and speech (verbal). In addition, teachers will provide students with a variety of graphic organizers and give them opportunity to use manipulatives when necessary, to support their learning styles. The students will have the chance to complete certain assignments in the way they choose (written, drawn, or spoken), to be able to show mastery of content. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? Our vision is to collect and analyze data to drive instructional decision-making across the school community. We envision using the quarterly reporting process to monitor progress and make data-driven decisions that help the school community reach its goals. Structures to support this work include using a six week data cycle for teacher teams, instructional leadership team, and cabinet level data meetings. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 18  Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose Iready (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) Diagnostic, benchmark & summative GoMath Diagnostic Formative Summative Benchmark Simulation Tests (ELA & Math) Fundations Diagnostic Benchmark (formative & summative) Ready Paper & pencil (Math/ELA) Diagnostic formative assessment 3-5 K-5 3-5 K-2 3-5 Identify reading Levels, targeted instruction, progress monitor Identify students strengths and weaknesses in an effort to plan instruction and for the students to be proficient in the standards Monitor the students understanding of the standards Monitoring early literacy development ILT and teacher teams will use data derived from the item skills analysis from Ready to determine where additional intervention is required. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019 we will improve the rigor of English Language Arts for all students, with a focus on the Students with Disabilities and English Language Learner subgroups through greater emphasis on data and assessment, as measured by an increase in average student proficiency from 2.42 to 2.45 on the New York State ELA Exam. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Increase by .19 on the New York State ELA Exam 2018-19 RSCEP-R 19  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Systematic approach to assess the students understanding to inform next instructional steps. Implement Teachers’ College Writing units and infuse with the Readygen ELA Curriculum. Targeted focus on Teacher's College Professional Development provided and support, with ongoing monitoring as needed Will continue to strengthen the ELA prototype (Readygen curriculum) and implement throughout the school to create a system of uniformity. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) All Students ELA September 2018-June 2019 Admin Team, Teachers, Coaches and support staff Increase in iReady results, Teacher Team meeting minutes agendas with instructional next steps, unit assessments and lesson plan with groupings and plan for how they will check for understanding and make adjustments All Students ELA September 2018-June 2019 Admin Team, Coaches & Teaching Staff TC unit assessments All Students ELA September 2018-June 2019 (Every 6 weeks, aligned to assessment cycle) Ready Gen unit assessments and PD calendar Admin Team, Coaches & Teaching Staff Advance Rating Domain 1e Review of Lesson Plans classroom observations ILT/Teacher Teams: (Monitor the pacing 2018-19 RSCEP-R 20  Teachers will provide clear student friendly feedback tightly aligned to the objective/rubric in both ELA & writing. For example: students will receive 3 step feedback: (a glow, grow, and an example of a next step, aligned to the objective). Develop a system that promotes student's ownership of their own learning and growth. The school will continue to strengthen the data team which will assist teachers during grade level meetings to disaggregate data collected from formal and informal assessments. Teachers will use this information to adjust their lesson planning to differentiate tasks, provide materials and scaffolds, that can support SWD's & ELL's calendar and analyze EOU assessment data) Review ELA prototype Admin Team & Teaching Staff Classroom observations All Students ELA September 2018-June 2019 (at the end of each unit -approximately every 6 weeks) Teachers Students Rigorous Instruction September 2018 -June 2019 Instructional Leadership Team, School Leaders, Teachers Teachers Rigorous Instruction September 2018 -June 2019 Students, with a focus on SwDs & ELLs Advance observation data, Instructional Leadership Team, School LeadersInstructional Leadership Team, School Leaders Review student work products Tracking of classroom Dojo assignments, review assessment data chats with students. classroom observations, student self assessment tools (rubrics/checklists) Review of lesson plans w/group activities Increase in Advance component 3D, Advance observation data Review of coach observations, bi weekly meetings with coaches to 2018-19 RSCEP-R 21  in their work products. School leaders will provide immediate, actionable feedback to teachers on the use of data to differentiate instruction. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement review data & practices Lesson plans Math Tracker How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. GJS will engage families through the use of Class Dojo, phone calls, in-person meetings, academically-based workshops and special events. Teachers will use Class Dojo daily to communicate with parents/caretakers regarding their child's academic performance and classroom expectations, being sure to let parents know when students are making positive gains as well as sharing any concerns and answering specific questions. The administrative team will support teachers in the utilization of Class Dojo, providing training and guidance as needed. Class Dojo will be emphasized at our Back-to-School night in the fall in order to ensure that all families sign up to receive communication via this app. Teachers will also make phone calls to parents and invite them in for in-person meetings when more in-depth communication regarding a child's academic, social or emotional growth is necessary. The school will also host monthly academically-based workshops, facilitated by both teachers and CBOs in order to provide parents with information, tools and resources in order to support their child's academic and social growth at home. Lastly the school, alongside of Partnership With Children, will host monthly special events to celebrate student achievements with families and provide opportunities for learning and creativity alongside one another, such as a Poetry and Paint night, and a Wacky Science Challenge night. School leaders will monitor family engagement logs, family/parent event attendance, and support parent/family satisfaction surveys. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. Instructional resources needed to implement the above action plan include Ready Gen, Go Math, Ready NY, iReady, MyOn, TC writing. Scholastic ELA Classroom Library, student incentives, ELA afterschool/Saturday program staffing/per session (after school, Saturdays February & April break, MacBooks for ELT technology programs, Chrome book sets for each grade, Cool Culture Museum trips (3K-Kindergarten) transportation, Teachers College Coaching, ENL afterschool program. Human resources include the AIS team, ENL teacher, SETSS provider, parent coordinator, literacy/math coach, and Administrative team Per session/ Per Diem funds are also needed to ensure that teachers have adequate and up-to-date training in the above instructional programs and supports. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 22  X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019 our work on use of data and assessment during ELA will result in 60% of students scoring at level 2, 3, or 4 as measured by Ready NY assessments in ELA. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Ready NY ELA assessment Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and X SOP(s) Addressed sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths ● With the assistance of “ the “21 st Century Grant,” the students have an opportunity to partake in an array of enrichment activities that help with their social-emotional development. ● Families are afforded the chance to participate in on campus workshops facilitated by faculty members and/or CITE consultants. Needs ● Based on the Supportive Environment component in the Framework for Great Schools Report, students should receive social-emotional guidance from qualified individuals that can provide them with the support that is needed to help them press toward academic achievement. ● Based on the high number of incidents in the OORS system, we need to improve peer interactions and decrease unwanted students behaviors by reorganizing the current PBIS system Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment 2018-19 RSCEP-R 24  What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? As an NYC Community School, our school culture is a key piece of our success with a focus on our TIGER values: Trustworthiness, Integrity, Generosity, Empathy and Respect. Our school environment is centered around the development of trust between staff, students, families and community partners. We work collaboratively as a team to meet the mission and vision of our school community because we truly believe that it takes a village to raise a child. Our school takes a holistic approach to student learning, knowing that the students’ and families’ physical and social-emotional health is vital for students to achieve academically. In order to meet these needs, our school has a host of initiatives to serve our community including, but not limited to:  Attendance Matters: the first step to student success is to ensure that they’re here every day. To this end, our Attendance Matters initiative includes a dedicated Student Success Summit team that meets weekly to tackle individual and school-wide attendance challenges, the assignment of Success Mentors to chronically absent students, attendance rewards for classes and individual students with 100% or improved attendance and the distribution of student attendance profiles to teachers, students and families. As a result, our attendance has improved since the 2014-15 school year.  Turnaround Arts: this partnership, sponsored by the President’s Committee on the Arts and Humanities, is designed to bring arts education resources to our school as a strategic tool for targeting larger school challenges and opportunities. The integration of arts into our school environment, through activities such as community circles, brain breaks, Acting Right student engagement program and a culminating school musical, all led by our Arts Leadership Team, has contributed to our students’ academic improvement and helped to decrease disciplinary problems.  Mental Health Support: through Partnership with Children (PWC) and Single Shepherd, our students have access within the school to individual, small group and full class counseling services to address social-emotional needs that may be hindering learning. PWC and Singe Shepherd Social Workers and Counselors are on-site every day to support students and staff, as well as manage emotional crises if they arise. Additionally, PWC and Single Shepherd work in conjunction with other school-based support staff to implement social-emotional curriculum in all of our classes. We use CASEL as our SEL framework, using the 5 competencies (self- awareness, social awareness, self-management, relationship skills, and responsible decision making) to drive our SEL planning implementation. These supports help to decrease behavioral issues in the classroom so that students can focus on learning.  Positive Behavioral Interventions & Supports (PBIS): our Dean of Students leads this school-wide initiative to teach behavioral expectations through a positive, easy-to-remember lens that matches the way any core curriculum is taught. Rather than simply telling our students what to do, we are consistently focused on modeling appropriate behaviors and celebrating students when they make positive choices that support their own learning and their community. Some examples of PBIS activities include the distribution of attendance awards, monthly Tiger Talks to emphasize our shared community values and the consistent communication of TIGER values through posters and announcements. The PBIS initiative plays a key role in ensuring student focus, follow-through, initiative and motivation so that students can thrive in our school and beyond.  Enrichment Programs: our school offers a wide variety of enrichment programming during our Extended Learning Time, as well as afterschool. Through our 21st century learning grant and our partnership with a multitude of organizations coordinated through our Community Schools initiative, students are exposed to a wide variety of academic, arts, sports and technology programs to encourage their growth inside and outside of the classroom. These programs serve to expose to students to a variety of career paths, provide extra academic support and motivate students to come to school each day so they can participate in their favorite activities. Some examples of programs offered are: Brooklyn Community Services afterschool, dance, basketball, martial arts, film-making, math league, Google Scratch, Reading Rescue, percussion, visual art, Book Buddies, double-dutch and Lego robotics, among many others. We are grateful to community leaders, such as Council member Darlene Mealy, Assemblywoman Latriece Walker, and State Senator Jesse Hamilton, who support us in seeking out these great programs. Family Engagement: see section 5E   Health & Wellness: our school implements an array of Health & Wellness initiatives including school-wide vision screenings (and distribution of free glasses accordingly), on-site dental services through Healthy Smiles NYC, Live 2018-19 RSCEP-R 25  Light Live Right fitness program, Top Chef cooking program and our Health and Wellness Council, a sub-committee of our Community School Team. Leadership Teams—to promote a positive school culture and academic success for all students, our community stakeholders participate on a variety of teams. These teams collaborate to build on evidence-based best practices that will positive impact our school environment and student learning. Academic teams, such as our Learning Partners Program, Curriculum Mapping Team and Instructional Cabinet, utilize standard-based materials and the Danielson Framework to assess and improve the quality of school culture. Other teams, such as the School Leadership Team and the Community School Team use data (such as from the New Visions Student Sorter and Attendance Heat Map) to evaluate the success of the initiatives above and ensure we are meeting our school community’s needs. We will be proactive in collecting and using data to drive not only academic programs but also social emotional learning strategies. We will strengthen our Pupil Personnel Team to effectively to look at students and families from a holistic lens and create action plans. There will be accountability for action plans and they will be revisited at PPT meetings which will take place monthly with key stakeholders, including parents of students who are being conference. Students will be triaged at PPC meetings who exhibit mental health, behavioral and attendance challenges. Partnership with Children will provide individual counseling, small group counseling, full classroom intervention classes and/or advisories. Families will be provided with casework services and connected with additional resources as need. We are also creating a Family Resource Room where families can come for access to workshops, computers, books, and more. We will measure social – emotional development from using data such as attendance, incidence reports, suspensions and the Partnership with Children SEL rubric. This will be shared with teachers, parents and other CBOs working with students. For attendance improvement, we have launched an Attendance Matters campaign to promote the value of being in school and reward students when they come consistently ready to learn. Elements of the campaign include monthly attendance celebrations (such as parades through the school giving out awards and certificates to students with perfect or improved attendance), a more rigorous follow-up protocol for students who are chronically absent (and/or late), family outreach and weekly Student Success Summits where a team of staff come together to match students with interventions specifically tailored to the root causes of each student’s attendance challenges. We are also implementing a more rigorous late policy and using the app, Kinvolved, to more regularly update families on student attendance and lateness. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? Strengthen student abilities and supporting the school community. CBO Focus On Decision Making Skills, Problem solving and conflict styles. CBO Partner Partnership with Children New York Peace Institute How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? Our partnership with the New York Peace Institute will help us maintain our supportive community by equipping students with the skills needed to make good decisions or think twice when in conflict. Also the program trains students 2018-19 RSCEP-R 26  with the foundation to becoming peer mediators, which in turn, they can help mediate conflict within our school community. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, the number of students identified as chronically absent will decrease from 38% to 28%, as measured by ATS reports and the attendance heat map. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve: Attendance Students assessment scores will increase if their attendance improves (Rigorous Instruction) Student Attendance Benchmark 2018-19 RSCEP-R 27  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Success Mentorship Program will continue At risk students Supportive Environment with a targeted focus on chronically absent students. Chronically absent students September 2018 - June 2019 Partnership With Children, Student Success Summit Team, Admin Team, Other CBO's Increase in daily attendance; decrease in tardiness & chronic absenteeism. CSD, Attendance team Data sorter Licensed professionals CBO's (including lead CBO Partnership With Children) and school staff will work together to provide individualized support to minimize student absenteeism. PBIS Incentives and reward programs will be implemented to celebrate student achievement and growth in academics, attendance, and citizenship, and maintain a respectful and safe school environment All Students Supportive Environment September 2018 - June 2019 Admin Team, CBO (Partnership With Children), Student Success Summit Team Decrease in the number of chronically absent Students. Increase student academic growth reflected in classroom grades and assessments. Decrease in number of serious behavior incidents; decrease in suspensions/OORS; School will implement a robust enrichment initiative, including academic, sports, arts and technology All Students Supportive Environment September 2018- June 2019 Admin Team, CBOs, School Staff, CSD 2018-19 RSCEP-R 28 chronically absent students Supportive Environment October 2018 -June 2019 Student Achievement Team (SAT), CBO (Partnership with Children), Admin team increase in attendance; decrease in chronic absenteeism and tardiness; increase in academic growth Decrease in number of serious behavior incidents; decrease in suspensions/OORS; increase in attendance; decrease in chronic absenteeism and tardiness; increase in academic growth Schedule for enrichment during 9th period programs in order to motivate students, keep them focused on achievement, and expose them to a wide variety of college and career paths School leaders will convene a committee to develop a strategic system to monitor the effectiveness and impact of attendance, academic and SEDH interventions. The committee will modify the existing Google Sheet to include attendance, academic and SEDH interventions; train all staff members in using the existing spreadsheet, and develop a plan to monitor the impact of interventions on a monthly basis. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. As previously stated, the school will use a holistic approach to family engagement, highlighting student successes and incorporating parents into academic activities as well as social-emotional supports. In addition to communicating with families via Class Dojo regarding students' social emotional development and health, the school will also host the monthly workshops and celebratory special events to promote a positive learning environment for all community members, students and parents alike. Partnership With Children will play a key role in organizing these events and communicating directly with families regarding students' social emotional development and health. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per sessions, per diem, Staff to conduct home visits, School-wide activities for staff, students, and families. Celebrations and school trips for students with the highest attendance. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 RSCEP-R 29  X Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded X SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The mid-point benchmark that will be used to determine the effectiveness of our goal will be the student and parent surveys. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. I-Ready (ELA/Math) Pre-Post TC Writing , Ready Practice ELA/Math, Fountas and Pinnell assessment, Benchmark Assessments, MOSL, Fundations Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed X X X X 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths ● The majority of teachers collaborate in structured inquiry based teams. (Quality Review 2017-2018) Needs ● Student understanding of rubrics used to assess their work is uneven across classrooms. (Quality Review 2017-2018) Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? Teachers’ schedules have a built-in time for teacher collaboration weekly. During the meetings, the teachers "Unpack a Unit of Study", in which key standards skills and assessments are identified. The teachers also look at student work using the “Atlas Protocol,” examine student data, plan instruction and look at common assessments. Most of our teachers create lesson plans together with the exception of including what is needed for their specific group of students. This year, grade level teams work together to align and modify the curriculum. Grade leaders and model teachers, will work with the teachers to improve instruction and demonstrate best practices. Teachers will have the opportunity to visit 2018-19 RSCEP-R 31  each others classroom and debrief with other in a manner where they feel safe to provide each other with feedback. Modeling will continue to take place by the instructional coach. Teachers should review the soft data that is collected as they circulate their classrooms during instruction, conferencing notes, and exit slips provided to them from the students. Teachers should review student work collaboratively in teams. By reviewing students work in teams, teachers can identify trends and share best practices that can be used to their colleagues classrooms. In addition, teacher teams should look at common assessments and determine skills that the students have mastered and the skills that need to be re-taught. How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? The cabinet meet weekly to discuss best practices and conduct walk-throughs. Teachers are then given timely feedback to improve their practice. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Teachers meet weekly to discuss different topics base on the data. They also review different strategies and skills that they can be implemented in their classrooms to improve instruction. Teacher take turns being the facilitator and take on different roles in the meetings. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Our vision is for all the ELA and Math teachers to meet across grade levels to discuss student work and to see how the standards are spiraled across the grades, every week. Cluster teachers will also meet with teacher teams across grade levels, every other week. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) To see if students are making progress, making goals and meeting the standards in ELA and math.. This will also provide the teacher with concrete data on whether or not he or she needs to modify and re-teach the lesson to meet students' needs. Intent Data Reviewed Iready DIagnostic and Benchmark tests, GoMath and ReadyGen Unit Assessments. Ready Practice Exams ELA/Math Fundations Running Records. Teacher's College Pre and Post Writing Samples. TBD TBD TBD TBD 2018-19 RSCEP-R 32  Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, teachers will engage in cycles of inquiry in order to improve their instructional practices (discussion, questioning and assessment) as measured by an increase in the average student proficiency index by .05 percent from 2.25 to 2.30 on the NYS Math Exam. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Collaborative Teachers Rigorous Instruction 2018-19 RSCEP-R 33  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Strengthen weekly collaborative planning sessions among teachers with strong systems and structures. For example, all teachers will log into their G Suite accounts and ensure that agendas and minutes live on their Google drive. Classroom inter-visitations internally and externally to allow teachers to observe their colleagues' best practices. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Teachers Collaborative Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Admin Team, Coach, Teachers and support staff All Teachers and Paraprofessionals Collaborative Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Admin Team, Coach, Teachers The Instructional Leadership Team will meet to develop Professional Learning Cycles to support the improvement of All Teachers Collaborative Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Admin Team, Coach, Teachers How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) collection of teacher team agendas and review of math trackers via (Google Drive) G Suite accounts and minutes via Google platform with rotating roles review of teacher reflections on Intervisitation forms with schedules of intervisitations. Teacher Team Agendas Advance observation data; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 34  teaching across the school. Develop and schedule the implementation of mini-assessments All teachers Rigorous Instruction September 2018-June 2019 Admin Team, Coach, Teachers All teachers Collaborative Teachers September 2018-June 2019 ILT, Teachers, Admin Team, Coaches Analyze student data during teacher team and ILT meetings (student work, mini-assessments, iReady, etc.) ILT agendas, (G-suite) schedule for learning cycles Student assessment data, review of Assessment schedule tracker for math G Suite meeting tracking; teacher observation data; admin data chats with teachers, Teacher team meeting agendas 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the 2018-19 school year, we will continue to push for parents/caretakers to attend workshops hosted collaboratively by teachers and for them to participate alongside one another in joint brainstorms driven towards student success. Our Parent Coordinator and Partnership With Children will work with teachers in order to develop workshop content that is engaging to families and promotes this kind of collaborative culture. Workshops will take place monthly during family engagement sessions on Monday afternoons. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session funding, Schedule adjustments for collaborative planning Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 35  X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Teachers will administer ongoing math mini-assessments aligned to NY State Standards. By February 2019, the projected performance index in Math based on these assessments will be 65. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Math mini-assessments Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths (Central-led Review/APPR) ● Decisions are made with the students interest as a priority in regards to staffing, budgeting and instruction. ● The administrative team and the cabinet meet regularly to look at classroom observation data, student data (assessments, OORS reports, student work, etc…)  The school maintains a learning environment that is nurturing to staff/students and supports professional growth.  Teachers plan together on a regular basis on teacher teams and other professional period times. Needs ● Provide the teachers with timely actionable feedback to instruct next steps.  Establish a system to ensure curricular aligned assessment practices that measure progress and identify needs. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership 2018-19 RSCEP-R 37  What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? The school leader will continue to articulate the shared vision and mission throughout the whole school community. On the first day of school, each staff member is given the mission and vision statement to post in their classrooms. As you walk through the hallways, the mission and vision statement is posted on all floors. The staff will also receive a staff handbook that outlines the high expectations set for teaching and learning at our school. The principal along with the administrative team will be transparent in decision making and will continue to maintain an open door policy with the teachers as well as the CBO. The school leader will conduct monthly staff meetings and send memos and newsletters that will keep the school community aware of our values and expectations. The school leader will align their fiscal and human capital towards fulfilling the school mission and support students academically, socially and emotionally. The school leader will partner with parents and CBO's to support the mission of the school. The mission and vision of 284 will be at the forefront of our work for the students. Through the use of staff, student and parent surveys, we will gather feedback from the school community to help us improve in the areas that concern individuals the most. We will seek advice from the CBO to assist us in meeting the needs of those individuals. With student academic, social and emotional success as a priority, all programs will be implemented based on the student’s needs. The collaboration with Partnership for Children will help the school to bring in programs that are best for the school community by evaluating all options, designing a strategic approach and then beginning to recruit appropriate partnerships. The CBO will continue to meet in the Tigers Den to elicit feedback from the school community in regards to strengthening the leadership and ensuring that the school leaders are transparent. A teacher observation schedule will be created with dates that will ensure every administrator observes every teacher. The administrator will schedule a post-observation conference with the teacher in a timely fashion to share actionable feedback with the teachers. The administrator will also share the feedback with the others administrators and will give the teacher a turnaround time to see if the next steps are being implemented. The time between informal and formal observations, the administrative will conduct snapshots and make instructional rounds and provide the teachers with actionable feedback within 24 – 48 hours. On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? We plan to continue incorporating the arts in all grades Pre-K-5. School wide non-negotiable rules will be implemented for all staff.The day will be scheduled so that its more productive and able to provide more effective leadership. Ongoing observations and actionable feedback will continue to be given to to staff, in order for them to use the information they receive to improve their practice. What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 38  In an effort to support a shared accountability , the school community would meet monthly and/or communicate through newsletters and school Messenger what is going on in our school. The school's staff handbook, given in the beginning of the year, will outline the school's high expectations, instructional focus and best practices. More information in regards to the school's accountability will be disseminated regularly so the school community can be kept abreast of our school's status. The school will seek out assistance from the district representative and CBO to pursue other ways to get the information out to the community. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? The vision is to utilize staff strengths and interests to conduct teacher led professional development workshops. The school leader will utilize Model Teacher, Grade Leaders, as well as, partner with Learning Partner Program to work with teachers to build capacity model best practices, and facilitate inter-visitations- and debriefing sessions. The grade leaders will also serve as members of the Instructional Leadership Team as a means to foster leadership and build capacity within our school. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? The school leader will continue to meet with CBO and Parent Coordinator to conduct monthly meetings that foster collaborative processes with all school stakeholders. How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy Daily/Weekly 24-48 hours The school leader will norm withthe administrative team using the DanielsonFramework. The school leader will provide actionable next steps and Professional Development What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Advance Rating System PD, Intervisitation, Coaching Peer Schools. CBO's, Central Office TBD TBD TBD How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? Students will be provided with the necessary materials that cater to their needs. Students will have access to technology in the classroom to use a learning tool as well as manipulative, graphic organizers etc. During the Extended Learning Time students will be given the opportunity to choose different programs and activities that interest them. Teacher programs will continue to include times for teachers to meet collaboratively, within and across grades, to ensure that lessons are being planned with students' needs in mind. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 39  Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, school leaders will provide ongoing professional development and feedback to teachers on more effective assessment strategies that can be implemented before, during and after instruction which will result in a 10% increase in the aggregate teacher score for Danielson Component 3d. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Rigorous Instruction Assessment 2018-19 RSCEP-R 40  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Professional development will be used to continually strengthen teacher assessment strategies. All Teaching Staff Rigorous Instruction September 2018-June 2019 Admin Team, Coach, Data Analyst, Lead Teachers Professional time, as well as teacher team meetings will focus on effective assessment practices. These professional development sessions will be facilitated by teachers, coaches, and administrators of our building. Other outside professional development opportunities will be offered to teachers throughout the course of the year. Teachers will share the various assessment strategies that they have successfully used in their classrooms. Then the strategies will be analyzed by teachers for their effectiveness in identifying common trends between students of individual classrooms, in common grades and across grades, during their Teacher Team meetings. Both qualitative and quantitative needs How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Professional Development Workshop agendas Teacher Team agendas increase in Domain component 3D ratings under Advance Professional Development Calendar Assessment Calendar 2018-19 RSCEP-R 41  assessments professional development workshops will be given.Coaches will provide job embedded coaching support with an emphasis on modeling effective assessment practice and guidance to teacher teams. Differentiated professional development will be provided to teachers to address the needs of our ELL and SWD population. In addition, teachers will be trained on writing quality IEPs with standard based goals. With the assistance of Partner With Children, more opportunities for parental engagement will be available to the families. Instructional Leadership Team will meet weekly to identify a specific structure/system to monitor the effectiveness and impact of the use of informal and formal assessment data to differentiate planning and instruction. This will be reported to the staff quarterly, and monitored/revised monthly to ensure fidelity and effectiveness. All Teaching Staff Supportive Environment September 2018-June 2019 Admin Team, Coach, Data Analyst, Lead Teachers, CITE, Review of Lesson Plans for Multiple Entry Points Partnership with Brooklyn North FSC to support ICT & SC teachers & paras All Staff Effective School Leadership September 2018-June 2019 Admin team, Partnership With Children Teachers Effective School Leadership October 2018-June 2019 Instructional Leadership Team, School Leaders PD Agendas PD Matrix Lesson Plans Parent Workshop agendas and attendance Teachers' ratings in Danielson Component 3D-Assessment Ready Gen Unit assessments Go Math unit assessments trackers, 2018-19 RSCEP-R 42  4b – Parent and Family Engagement Data newsletters How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. With the support of lead CBO, Partnership With Children, the school will host monthly Community School Team (CST) meetings in order to plan collaboratively alongside of parents/caretakers and community partners. These CST meetings will be a supplement to the SLT and Parent Association and will begin during the month of September. All parents will receive communication asking them to join this team and provide input. In addition to the family survey implemented during the spring, the school will regularly solicit feedback from parents/caretakers regarding school leadership, parent involvement and building an even more supportive environment, through additional surveys, focus groups and open forums. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session, Schedule adjustments Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, a mid-year review of MOTP data will indicate a 5% increase in the aggregate teacher score for Framework for Teaching component 3d (Using Assessment in Instruction). Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ADVANCE data system Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 43  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths   Families receive frequent communication from the school via monthly school calendar, School Messenger, letters (bilingual), flyers, parent notes, progress reports and report cards. Families are afforded opportunities to attend school assemblies, parent association meetings, various school activities and parent workshops.  Home visits and phone calls are made to support families with students who are chronically absent or late. Needs (2015 AIR Assessment) ● Increase parental engagement in the school. ● Assess the families to identify their needs from the school community. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 44  Our school’s foundation is built on trust among our various stakeholders, with families, in particular, playing a huge role. Our students’ families are key players in their education and are crucial to increasing student achievement. Families fill leadership roles through our Parent Association, Community School Team and School Leadership Team, and also regularly volunteer in classrooms and for school events. In addition, using the Dual Capacity Framework as a model, we offer a variety of services and presentations for our families in order to meet their needs. Families are always welcome to come to our Tigers Den Community Resource Center in order to access resources and meet with school staff to work on their career development or continuing education. This Center is a space where family members are able to have meetings, do work, and have Internet access to complete resumes, apply for jobs and more. We also host a variety of health services in this Center, such as a mobile dental clinic and vision screenings. In addition, we also plan to continue offering topical workshops to parents as identified in the needs assessment, including topics relevant to supporting student success (i.e. Understanding State Tests) as well as adult learning opportunities (such as How to Prepare for the TASC exam and Computer Skills). Parents/guardians will have the opportunity to attend the classes with their children or independently. In this way, parents/guardians will gain more of an understanding of the Common Core Standards, what their children are learning in school, and how to access certain information in regards to the child’s progress, as well as model the benefits of continuous learning for their children. We also look to them for guidance on what kinds of programs to implement, seeking their feedback and participation through surveys and our annual Community School Forum. We would like to have more parental engagement so the families can have a more active role in their child’s learning and truly partner in enhancing each child's experience at our school. During regular forums, open houses and Community School Team meetings, families will be invited into the school to share their ideas, volunteer, and build their skills. Collaborative brainstorming and implementation between families and school staff will be a priority. Our Parents as Partners in Learning series has included workshops on Understanding the Common Core, Preventing Bullying and Promoting Literacy at Home, as well as presentations from our students, such as our Kindergarten Literacy to Life production of the Very Hungry Caterpillar. We also regularly host parent-teacher conferences, as well as family fun nights, such as our Thanksgiving Community Feast, Gingerbread House Extravaganza, Nosh ‘n Paint and Green Eggs and Ham celebration. Additionally, communication to families is frequent and in the families’ native language. We reach out via monthly calendars, letters, flyers, Robocalls and home visits, tailoring our communication to each family’s needs. They will also receive progress reports, report cards, and online data through iReady regularly. On Mondays, our teachers also have a 45 minute block of family engagement time where they can outreach to parents to answer questions or concerns parents/guardians may have, as well as communicate students’ progress and achievements. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? Families will be welcomed into the school through enhanced communication, including clear signage directing families where to go when they arrive and to whom they can speak in order to find what they need. The Tigers Den Community Resource Center will continue to serve as a space where families can convene for meetings, workshops and general usage when they need access to computers, internet, printing, etc. Our school is also going to be using Kinvolved next year in order to provide regular updates to families on student attendance and class performance. We will also be building out our website through a partnership with Connect With Kids, so that the website will be a more useful resource for enhanced communication. Additional, we use social media (Facebook and Twitter) to regularly update families and staff on what is going on at the school, and provide quick access to resources and information that is helpful, interesting or celebratory to the community. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 45  In addition to the Parent Association and School Leadership Team, our school also has a Community School Team on which parents sit. At every parent event, family members have the opportunity to complete "Count on Me" forms, detailing in what ways they would like to get involved in the school. School staff, primarily our Parent Coordinator or Community School Director, then follow up with those family members in order to keep them engaged in meaningful ways. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? During parent-teacher conferences, we will be using a model of Student-Led conferences so that students, guardians and teachers all play an active role in these important discussions. Using research-based practices, students will have the opportunity to walk their teachers and parents through a thorough review of their school performance and goal-setting exercises. Parents, in turn, can use these methods regularly with students at home in order to ensure they are learning and growing. We will also continue our Parents as Partners in Learning Series to engage families with their children's learning, and Parent-Teacher Home Visits to engage with families in goal-setting and relationship-building conversations. What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale Parent Workshops Student-led conferences Class Dojo Specific skill-building workshops enhance parent capacity to support students at home Modeling student-led goal-setting exercises at conferences means parents can walk their students through these same exercises at home Regular communication through this app will notify parents/guardians about student attendance and performance in school, so parents can follow up accordingly and in real time How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Parent Association, School Leadership Team, Parenting classes. Family partnerships with CBO: Community School Team, Workshops, Forums Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Yes. The Tigers Den Community Resource Center. What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? Through the needs assessment, we have learned that parents/guardians are interested in TASC, ESL, parenting, computer skills and job hunting skill-building classes. We will use the Tigers Den Community Resource Center to provide at least one skill-building class that meets regularly per term. We will encourage parents and other community organizations (non-profits, NYPD, etc.) to invite their members to participate so that it is truly open to the community. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 46  What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? We will utilize iReady, Class Dojo, and the DOE portal to ensure that parents have regular, up-to-date access to their children's school performance. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, school leaders in collaboration with the school’s lead CBO, Partnership With Children (PWC), will effectively partner with families as measured by a 10% percent increase in parent satisfaction on exit surveys. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Supportive Environment Effective School Leadership 2018-19 RSCEP-R 47  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Families Supportive Environment October 2018-June 2019 Administrative Team, Parent Coordinator, PA, CBO's, CSD Families and Students Supportive Environment October 2018- June 2019 Parent Coordinator Principal CSD Families Supportive Environment October 2018-June 2019 Administrative Team, Parent Coordinator, PA, CBO, Teachers, CSD Families, Students Supportive Environment October 2018-June 2019 Administrative Team, Parent Coordinator, PA, CBO Families will be given periodic school surveys to identify their needs and concerns. Parent Coordinator, teachers, and CBO's will also provide workshops for parents in conjunction with the Parent Association Parent Coordinator will continue to provide targeted parenting classes appropriate to grade band based on respective grade of the child, with a focus on mental and emotional needs of students. Partnership with Children will support teachers in hosting several academic workshops that strengthen parents ability to help children with academics at home. The school will maximize its communication with families around academics, by way of increased usage of class dojo, school website, and student sorter profiles. How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Beginning of year family needs assessment. Regularly implemented parent surveys following workshops or special events At the conclusion of every session parent surveys will be provided to participants to gauge their sense of satisfaction. School based surveys School Based parent feedback Surveys, NYC School survey results and event surveys & attendance at school 2018-19 RSCEP-R 48  Will continue with communicating with families in a timely manner through newsletters, fliers, School Messenger, letters/postcards, emails and the school’s website to address attendance, academic performance and behavior monitoring. The school will also communicate positive behavioral and academic progress for those students who are meeting benchmarks or making progress. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment events (i.e. Parent-Teacher conferences) Parent usage of class dojo, Report cards, individual profiles from data sorter, Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Community School budget (through Partnership With Children). Parent Coordinator, Community School Director, teacher collaboration. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, parent/family surveys conducted at the conclusion of events will show a 5% increase in parent/family satisfaction. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Exit surveys conducted after parent/family events Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 49  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all students will participate in the ELT program and have the opportunity to engage in additional targeted, small-group instruction to address academic areas of need, as well as enrichment activities. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Research has shown that more learning time can lead to higher achievement, better attendance, and healthier attitudes and habits that put students on the path for success. Therefore, all students in grades K-5 scoring a level 1 and 2 are targeted for ELA and Math services during Expanded Learning Time. Additionally, all students will be encouraged to participate in the grade appropriate extended learning programs. The extended learning time will be customized to meet the needs of all students. Students will be able to participate in multiple programs based on interests. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 50   Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? Our Expanded Learning Time enrichment program here at GJS is designed to meet the academic and social-emotional needs and interests of our community through a wide variety of activities. In our Primary grades (Pre-K-2), pedagogical staff design and lead activities based on students' demonstrated need during the school day. Examples include book talks, science fair projects, iReady, math games and art-based activities. In Elementary and Middle School grades (3-8), students will participate in a combination of academic and enrichment activities led by both teachers and CBO partners. Every student will have at least two days per week of academically-based intervention. The content of that intervention will be based on assessment of student need in ELA, math and science. During the other two days, students will have access to enrichment activities, with a specific focus on sports, arts and technology opportunities. Students will complete interest surveys at the beginning of the year and be assigned to activities accordingly. They will have the chance to switch their "elective" ELT courses in cycles throughout the year. Teachers will also have the opportunity to identify the content areas they are interested in teaching and use that content to enhance students' academic skills, for example designing a course on fashion that also enhances students reading and writing capacity. Based on student requests, teacher input and CBO availability, ELT academic and enrichment activities may include: Poetry Slam, Book Buddies, Book Clubs, Math Games, Technology Tigers, Robotics, Coding, Visual Art, Theater, Glee Club, Dance, Instrument Instruction, Basketball, Yoga, Soccer, ESL and more. We will also offer small counseling groups during ELT to meet the socio-emotional needs of students. Regardless of what age group teachers work with, all teachers will also regularly be provided with recommended curriculum and resources that can be used during ELT to supplement their research and design. By offering a variety of programs and other incentives, students’ attendance will increase. Our program will have individual as well as well as group activities which will foster collaborative interactions and team spirit. In addition, our programs will help develop students’ thinking skills so that can make better decisions for themselves and others. Working in groups also pushes students to take on leadership roles within their groups. Our K-8 programs will also include math, science and literacy and will be aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 51  3. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? PS/IS 284 teachers will implement the ELT program with a small team of school leaders designing and supporting the strategy, including the Principal, the Data Specialist, the SPED Liaison and the Partnership With Children Community School Director. In addition, classrooms will receive extra support from our afterschool program provider, Brooklyn Community Services in order to increase one-on-one support for students during this time block. Various CBOs will also be subcontracted to provide services as needed. The programs will be evaluated by the students using surveys and monitoring students’ progress. Students will also receive grades for their participation in ELT learning and programs in order to keep track of their own growth. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September, 2017-June, 2018 Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Partnership With Children Community School Director Teachers Sub-contracted CBOs Brooklyn Community Services 9-period schedule Per session funding Materials-General Supplies, Instructional Materials, Incentives Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. X X 21st Century Title I 1003(a) Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks We will monitor the progress and make improvements when necessary during Teacher Team Meetings and Inquiry Team Meetings. Daily attendance will be taken to monitor students’ participation. We will use the Mid-year MOSL exams, and classroom assessment to monitor the progress of our students. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 52  Benchmark and summative scores Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 53  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. During the 2017-18, our school will:  Partner strategically with 10+ CBOs to provide physical & mental health services, academic enrichment and  family support Identify students and families in need of mental health support and design individualized plans to provide counseling and support services to those students as needed  Communicate with every family at least 4x during the school year, with a focus on student academic support, through phone calls, home visits, parent teacher conferences & special events  Decrease chronic absenteeism rates and improve attendance for 75% of students or more  Provide continuous learning opportunities for families through workshops, ESL classes and volunteer opportunities  Provide sports, arts and technology enrichment opportunities to every student Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Attendance ELA state test scores Math state test scores Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Partnership With Children Pre-K-8 Single Shepherd 6-8 Mental health & Community Schools: individual counseling, group counseling, crisis de-escalation, PD, restorative justice, Social-Emotional Learning classroom push-ins; health & wellness, academic enrichment, attendance improvement, family engagement, school culture Mental health: individual & small group counseling, social-emotional suport, crisis de-escalation 2018-19 RSCEP-R 54 Turnaround Arts PreK-8 Brooklyn Community Services K-5 Arts integration, PD, arts enrichment, Arts Leadership Team support Afterschool program: academic enrichment, family engagement, attednance improvement 2. 3. 4. Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. We will work in partnership with the CBO to meet the needs of our children and community. The Community School Director will lead the implementation of needs assessment. Social workers will conduct student assessment needs by gathering information from a variety of sources including school administrators, teachers, parents, interaction with students, observations and analysis of relevant student data. Students will then be placed in the appropriate level of care based on their need. Levels of care would be mental health services, individual counseling. In addition, social workers will meet with assigned students weekly to work on social, behavioral, emotional, academic family, and attendance goals. Social workers will help students build social skills, provide tools to effectively express themselves and manage conflicts, and teach leadership skills. Additionally, social workers will provide intervention strategies in the classrooms to help minimize bullying and help underscore the benefits of healthy relationships. Staff members of Partnership with Children will provide information on other services such as health care clinics, housing resources, legal aid and other emergency assistance programs. Social workers will help parents navigate systems and advocate on family’s behalf. Partnership with Children will organize and host various school-wide events and trips to strengthen relationships, promote a positive school culture and expose students to activities that will widen their perspectives and enrich their lives. Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight 2018-19 RSCEP-R 55  Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students School Administrators, social workers, and staff from Partnership with Children will oversee and ensure the implementation of these programs. Partnership with Children will conduct yearly surveys to determine parent satisfaction with the services provided and to identify any areas that need to be strengthened. Additionally, Partnership with Children will conduct phone interviews and in-person focus groups with parents to gather information about families experiences with the program. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. The staff members of Partnership with Children will work with the school community to provide support based on the needs assessment. This implementation will require regular collaboration, the designation of space for counseling sessions and a Community Resource Center for activities to take place during and after school. Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Implementation began in September, 2015, and will continue through June, 2022 (guaranteed through the 21st Century Grant). Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 56  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) State Test Scores, performance tasks, class assessments, EZR assessment Benchmark scores, RunniningRecords, IReady, Ready Assessment Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Success Maker, iReady, myOn, small group, Fundations Reading Rescue, Ireadonline program, Iread and Afterschool program. Whole group discussions, small group instruction, flexible grouping, Tutor/Peer Buddy System, differentiated instruction During and after school. Mathematics Science Success Maker, iReady, myOn, small group, FundationsGo Math Intervention, Ireadyonline rescources and Ready math books and After school program. Individual and/or small group instruction. State Test Scores, performance tasks, class assessments, EZR assessment Go Math Diagnostic Assessment, End of unit test, Chapter test, PeformanceTask, IreadyAssessment State Test Scores, performance tasks, class assessments End of unit tests, rubrics 1.1 tutoring (Reading Rescue) Push in/Pull out resource room Whole group discussions, small group instruction, flexible grouping, Tutor/Peer Buddy System, differentiated instruction Whole group discussions, small group instruction, flexible grouping, Tutor/Peer Buddy System, differentiated instruction During and after school. During and after school. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 57 Social Studies Performance tasks, class assessments End of unit tests, rubics, quizzes Individual and/or small group instruction. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Mandated and non-mandated, recommended by teachers or service providers. SEL& Guidance Lessons. During and after school. During school. Whole group discussions, small group instruction, flexible grouping, Tutor/Peer Buddy System, differentiated instruction Individual, small group, classroom lessons. Pull out and push in Family counseling 2018-19 RSCEP-R 58  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 25 Students are listed on STH 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students and families receive any assistance and services they may need, including attendance support through our Success Mentors Program and academic support through a variety of tutoring and mentoring services offered during our renewal hour and after-school. Parents also have access to assistance with finding a job, gaining a GED, and learning ESL coordinated by our Parent Coordinator and Partnership With Children staff. Students in temporary housing receive uniform, winter jackets as well as school supplies and backpacks. Families in STH housing are also offered assistance with food and holiday gifts, as needed. The liaison checks in on students and families to see if they need anything throughout the year. Families receive counseling as well as referrals to any outside agencies if needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 59  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-R 60  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Highly Qualified Teachers will be recruited through the use of Teachers of Tomorrow Program and the New Teacher Finder. Teachers recruited to work at the Gregory Jackson will be eligible for tuition / student loan reimbursement as a result of our Title I status with the United States Department of Education. Additionally, the Gregory Jackson School will reimburse teachers for expenses incurred as a result of tuition to reach Highly Qualified status. Professional development opportunities will be offered to those teachers that are not Highly Qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All Staff members will engage in ongoing differentiated professional development on the newly adopted CCSS curriculum. Professional development will be implemented into the schedule and take place on Mondays and Fridays. The staff will engage in weekly schedule professional development on instructional practices relative to the CIEs and Danielson. In addition, after school workshops are facilitated by the Professional Development Team and outside consultants. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not Applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 RSCEP-R 61  Not Applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). ● Parental Involvement- Monthly parent/family workshops ● Early Intervention Services ● ECERS Assessment ● CCSS aligned Pre-K Program 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. -Data Analyst in conjunction with the Inquiry Team works collaboratively to disaggregate the data in an effort to disseminate the results to entire staff and community that is used to create appropriate assessments. -Data Analyst conducts bi-weekly scheduled data talks with teacher teams as a means of providing professional development regarding the importance of data analysis and its implications. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal Federal 623,473.00 $16,979 X X 2018-19 RSCEP-R 62 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Pages 11-34 Pages 11-34  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $122,999 37,556.00 11,200.00 0 3,218,571.00 X X X X X Pages 11-34 Pages 11-34 Pages 11-34 Pages 11-34 Pages 11-34 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 63   Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 64  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS/IS 284, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P.S./I.S. 284 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 65  ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and 2018-19 RSCEP-R 66  inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 67  ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/IS 284, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 68  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 69  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 70 III. Student Responsibilities  Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 71  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 23 School Name PS/IS 284 Gregory Jackson School Borough Brooklyn School Number 284 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Keva Pitts-Girard Coach Jacqueline Reid ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Olga Naymushina, ENL teacher Teacher/Subject Area Lesley Ann Olushoga, K teacher Teacher/Subject Area Nanette Fantauzzi, K teacher Related-Service Provider Debra Pascall Superintendent Miatheresa Pate Assistant Principal Keisha Ferguson Coach N/A School Counselor Keishaia Griffith Parent Shanell Curtis Parent Coordinator Janie Sanders Field Support Center Staff Member Shirley Vargas Other (Name and Title) SETSS Tessil Hobson C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 RSCEP-R 72  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 500 Total number of ELLs 47 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.40% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? All students in grades K-8 are assessed with i-Ready and MyOn programs. This data is useful in a number of ways. First, it provides teachers with data about their students’ areas of strength and weakness: phonological awareness, phonics, high-frequency words, vocabulary, and comprehension (literature and informational text). Teachers are able to determine what reading level and approximate grade level their students are at in order to differentiate instruction appropriately and provide students with level text for independent reading. Also, it allows teachers to find the instructional level of text they use during guided reading. With this information, teachers can provide their students with the skills they need in order to grow and function at the next reading level. The school administers Fountas and Pinnell and MOSL assessments to identify the areas of need and measure students' 2018-19 RSCEP-R 73  growth. Additionally, ELLs partake in the Beginning of the Year assessment which demonstrates their levels of English language proficiency and allows the ENL teacher to group them accordingly. It also helps to create appropriate differentiated lessons in order to better serve the students' needs. During the periodic assessment, the teacher is able to see if the students have made any gains and if there is a need to modify the instructional delivery. According to the data received, the teachers plan their lessons in the way that benefits students of all levels. Lessons are differentiated to meet the needs of all the students. The teachers use flexible grouping to support students with deficiencies to enhance their skills. It also allows teachers to incorporate technology effectively. Additionally, after receiving the assessment results, teachers confer with the students to create a plan with their individual goals so that the students can take ownership of their learning. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The teachers use running records, progress monitor sheets, and on-going formative assessment to monitor student progress. Also, teachers conduct End-of-Unit assessment and TC Writing post tests to identify students' areas of growth and areas of need. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The ENL teacher and school leadership analyze and discuss data from the NYSESLAT annually once the scores become available. From the data, we look for trends, possible problem areas, and modalities that our students are the strongest in. The ENL teacher then looks closely at the instructional practices and materials used in the previous year and reflects on their efficacy. After the reflection, decisions are made by the ENL teacher and school leadership on which programs and instructional practices might work best to meet the needs of our students. Also, the ENL teacher and school leadership devise a list of students who need the most support and target those students for the extended day program as well as the Title III after-school program. The ENL teacher also makes decisions on the instructional focuses for the school year. The Title III after-school program is evaluated by comparing the growth of the students who participated in the service to those who did not. One key finding from the 2016-2017 school year was that students who regularly attended the Title III program had higher growth rates on the 2016 NYSESLAT than students who did not attend the program. Additionally, the EDAT is used by the ENL teacher to determine academic growth for the ELL students. This report demonstrate the areas of strength and weakness in the modalities of listening, speaking, reading, and writing.The results are shared with school leadership and classroom teachers. Additionally, the ENL teacher uses the data from the EDAT to evaluate instructional practices and program models from the previous year and makes adjustments to better meet the needs of ELLs at PS/IS 284. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Our school assigns several teachers to provide AIS services to the students that demonstrated poor results on assessments and are at risk of failure. In addition, several of our teachers and paraprofessionals received training in Reading Rescue Program in order to help individual students in grades 1 and 2 develop reading skills. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Classroom teachers generally confer with the ENL teacher regarding ELLs they feel may need additional academic support within the Response to Intervention (RTI) framework. The classroom teachers and ENL teacher work together to devise a plan to help support students and bridge the gaps they have in regards to the mainstream curriculum. The ENL teacher will do additional testing to pinpoint the specific deficits a student has, offer suggestions to the classroom teachers on how to address the ELLs deficits, and also work to address those deficits when she pulls the students out for ENL services. The ENL teacher and classroom teachers also assess ELLs regularly to determine their progress in closing the gap between their current 2018-19 RSCEP-R 74  performance level and grade-level readiness. For example, all students in the school are given the i-Ready and MyOn assessments to determine their reading level. However, ELLs who are newcomers or who cannot test with the i-Ready and MyOn are then given a phonics screener by the ENL teacher to determine their proficiency in phonemic awareness and reading readiness in English. Once the data is collected, the ENL teacher and classroom teachers devise an intervention plan (according to the interventions described in the RTI guide for ELLs) as well as a progress monitoring schedule to measure how well the ELLs who need additional support are progressing. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. In the fall of 2016 the ENL teacher used the EDAT to analyze ENL data based on Spring 2016 NYSESLAT. This tool demonstrates number of proficiency level advancements for NYSESLAT test takers and highlights modalities of strength and modalities of need. Analyzing this report allowed to identify reading and listening modalities as the areas of weakness. That led to important instructional decision – when planning the lessons, the ENL teacher puts emphasis on incorporating tasks that allow to develop students’ listening and reading comprehension skills. It has to be brought to attention that the current EDAT only reflects test results of the students who were enrolled in our school in September 2016. That is why it was important to analyze the RLAT report to identify academic growth of the students who graduated or were discharged. This report indicated that: three 8th graders advanced 3 proficiency levels two 8th graders and one 7th grader advanced two proficiency levels five students in grades 2, 6, and 8 advanced one proficiency levels Analyzing the results of the NYSESLAT allows the ENL teacher to identify how much English the students have acquired during the year. That also allows her to make instructional decisions about which areas need to be developed. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In the beginning of the school year, the ENL teacher meets with school administration to discuss the data and the next steps to improve academic growth of the ELL students. After that, the ENL teacher conducts a PD for all the teachers in school in order to inform them about the ENL students' academic progress and point out areas of strength and weakness for these students at each grade level. Additionally, ENL teacher provides classroom teachers with resources to use in ELA and Math to meet the needs of the ELL population. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our school utilizes push-in and pull-out models to meet the service mandates for current and former ELLs. Students are serviced in grade bands using a blocked, ungraded, and heterogeneous program model. Students of all proficiencies are served in grades K-2 together, grades 3-4 are served together, and grades 5,6,7, and 8 are served separately. Former ENL students in grades 5-8 receive integrated ENL services during the ELT (Extended learning Time) where an ENL teacher works in collaboration with a content area teacher. Former ENL students at the elementary level are provided with push-in ENL services. Due to the fact that there is one ENL teacher at our school, this was the only programming model to implement that ensured our students received the minimum program requirements. b. TBE program. If applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 75  Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our school provides students with stand-alone ENL and integrated ENL services. One ENL teacher serves them. Entering and Emergent ENL students receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week during their ELA instructional block and stand-alone ENL. Transitioning students receive 270 minutes of ENL instruction per week (90 minutes - in their classrooms during the ELA instructional time, and 180 minutes in the Stand Alone ENL class). Expanding ELLs receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week (90 minutes - in their classrooms during the ELA instructional time, and 90 minutes in the Stand Alone ENL class).We utilize a blocked, ungraded, and heterogeneous program model to ensure our students receive their minimum program requirements. Additionally, former ENL students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL services during the Extended Learning Time through a push-in model. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our school offers freestanding and integrated ENL services. In the freestanding ENL program, the ENL teacher pulls out students for services grouping them according to their grade and proficiency levels. The teacher plans lessons aligned to the CCLS l in the areas of listening, speaking, reading, and writing. The ENL teacher employs best practices and research-based methods in instructing ELLs. Additionally, newcomers receive an additional 100 minutes of instruction per week in the small group extended day program on Tuesdays and Wednesdays. In math, teachers use Spanish language texts for students in grades 1-5 to provide native language supports for students. In science, social studies, and math, content teachers have access to the NYSED bilingual glossaries to use when planning their lessons and to provide native language support to students in grades 3-8. Additionally, the ENL teacher regularly confers with content teachers and pushes into the classrooms once per week to provide instructional strategies and techniques to teachers to use in providing their ELLs entry points into the lesson. Some of the strategies include pairing ELLs with limited language skills with a bilingual student with proficiency in English, the use of realia, total physical response, the use of pictures when introducing new vocabulary, the use of graphic organizers, cognates, and sentence stems and scaffolds. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Since we only offer an ENL program, there are no assessments given to students to monitor their progress in their home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) are identified upon enrollment in our school and are closely monitored to determine where their deficits lie and what their academic and social needs are. An instructional plan is developed based on what the specific needs of the SIFE student are. Additionally, SIFE students participate in the freestanding ESL program at our school and also participate in the Title III after-school program. As the need arises, outside CBOs are contacted to support SIFEs both socially and academically. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 76  Newcomers receive an additional 100 minutes of instruction per week and also participate in the Title III after-school program. Our school is in the process of ordering the English Now curriculum. The ENL teacher will use this program to meet the English acquisition needs of newcomer ELLs. The ESL teacher supports ELLs receiving 4-6 years of service during the instructional day. The targeted instructional focus depends on the proficiency level of the specific student(s). For instance, if a student scored high in listening and speaking on the previous year’s NYSESLAT but low on the reading and writing modalities, the ENL teacher devises lessons that are primarily aimed to build the reading and writing skills of the student(s). The same approach is used for ELLs receiving more than 6 years of service. The ENL teacher closely analyzes the historic testing performance of long-term ELLs to identify trends and modalities in which the students score the lowest. Additionally, the ENL teacher verifies which students have an identified learning disability. If they do, the ENL teacher analyzes the qualitative and quantitative data in the IEP and employs the instructional recommendations in instructing students with disabilities. Former ELLs receive additional time on state assessments as allowed by the NYSED for two years after scoring commanding on the NYSESLAT. Additionally, Former ENL students receive 90 minutes a week of integrated ENL services during extended learning time through a push-in model. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? At PS/IS 284, the K-5 teachers use Go Math for mathematics instruction, Ready Gen and TC Writing for ELA instruction. The 6-8 teachers use Prentice Hall for ELA instruction and Go Math for mathematics instruction. Besides that, the school uses i-Ready, Think Central, and MyOn as supplemental programs to reinforce reading and math skills. These programs contain interventions for both students with disabilities and ELLs and create an individualized instructional program adapted to their level. Teachers use the interventions and instructional strategies provided in the programs coupled with recommendations from the IEP to meet the needs of ELLs with disabilities. All teachers within the school differentiate classroom tasks to meet the needs of ELLs with disabilities as well and incorporate UDL principles in lesson delivery to meet the learning needs of all students. Additionally, some ELLs with disabilities receive SETSS support. In this setting, they receive more individualized attention from the SETSS provider in a small group setting. ELLs with disabilities also participate in the freestanding ENL program at PS/IS 284. During pull-out sessions, their individual language acquisition needs are addressed by the ENL teacher. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELLs with disabilities at PS/IS 284 are placed into three instructional program designs determined by the IEP team: ICT settings, 12:1 or 12:1:1, or general education with SETSS services. ELLs with disabilities, depending on proficiency level, are serviced at the same time through the freestanding ENL program as the other ELLs in their grade band through pull-out services. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. In all content areas, differentiation occurs within the classroom to meet the needs of ELLs depending on proficiency level. Teachers use heterogeneous and homogeneous groupings within their classrooms to meet the needs of ELLs at all proficiency levels. When students are grouped by ability level, the teachers target ELLs with less English proficiency, differentiate their assignment or task, and provide them with the supports to enable them to meet the cognitive demands and complete the task. Additionally, sometimes teachers will use mixed-ability groups. The purpose of these groupings is to provide ELLs with exposure to more fluent and proficient speakers of English. In this arrangement, ELLs have a model for both spoken and written conventional English, have the opportunity to engage with more proficient speakers of English, and have the 2018-19 RSCEP-R 77  opportunity to hear and use more advanced vocabulary and sentence constructions in English. Additionally, the school offers an after-school Title III ENL program for intermediate students. The students receive an additional 2 hours per week in English in reading and writing. The aim of the Title III ENL program is to build the students' cognitive academic language proficiency. Additionally, the ENL teacher uses the Newcomer Program and Middle School Intervention program to address the needs of entering and emergent ELL students who have severe difficulties with reading and writing and English and low levels of literacy in their home language. The intervention takes place during the periods in which the targeted students are slated to receive ENL services from the ENL teacher. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The school leadership decided to subscribe to Learning A-Z online program for the upcoming school year to meet the needs of our ENL students. We are also working on the after-school program curriculum to ensure that our ENL students get additional support. The ENL teacher received training in TC Writing and Collaborative Strategic Reading. She incorporates these programs in the ENL curriculum in order to promote language acquisition among the ELL students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The schools in not discontinuing any programs for ELLs from the previous year, but looking to expand our program offerings to better meet the needs of our growing ELL population. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ESL students are encouraged to take advantage of several supplemental and after-school services at PS/IS 284. Many of our ELLs participate in Century 21 - sports and arts programs, Turnaround arts - program designed to infuse the curriculum with arts, and Title III after-school supplemental instruction (ENL club) - aimed to provide additional instruction to ENL students. In all programs in our school, ELLs are assigned to a bilingual facilitator or placed in groups where there are bilingual students that can translate for the participant learning English. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All ENL students have access to bilingual Spanish/English dictionaries. In math, science, and social studies, they also have access to bilingual glossaries and textbooks. In the ENL classroom, they have access to computers where they can translate into their home language using Google translate if needed. Additionally, ELLs with disabilities have access to iPads and computers in their classrooms where they can use applications designed to support their English language acquisition and access to the general curriculum. PS/IS 284 also provides Spanish math texts to ENL students who are literate in their home language. Additionally, students have access and can borrow Spanish language reading materials and dual-language books from the ENL classroom. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? PS/IS 284 only has a freestanding ESL program. All ESL students have access to bilingual Spanish/English dictionaries. In math, science, and social studies, they also have access to bilingual glossaries. In the ENL classroom, they have access to computers where they can translate into their home language using Google translate if needed. Additionally, ELLs with disabilities have access to iPads in their classrooms where they can use applications designed to support their English language acquisition and access to the general curriculum. Additionally, the classroom teachers who do not speak the home language of the ELL will partner the student up with bilingual students who can translate and offer assistance and support to students with less English proficiency. Also, the ENL teacher and content teachers employ cognates (Spanish to English) in lesson delivery to support ELLs. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 78  The ESL teacher in our school works in collaboration with the content area teachers to ensure that the students of all ages and levels receive required services. The teachers analyze the results of periodic assessments in order to indicate what additional resources can be utilized to meet the needs of the students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All ENL students have access to bilingual Spanish/English dictionaries. In math, science, and social studies, they also have access to bilingual glossaries and textbooks. In the ESL classroom, they have access to computers where they can translate into their home language using Google translate if needed. Additionally, ELLs with disabilities have access to iPads and computers in their classrooms where they can use applications designed to support their English language acquisition and access to the general curriculum. PS/IS 284 also provides Spanish math texts to ENL students who are literate in their home language. Additionally, students have access and can borrow Spanish language reading materials and dual-language books from the ENL classroom. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). PS/IS 284 currently does not have any programs that support newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Students do not usually enroll far enough in advance for this to become feasible. However, the ENL teacher or a Spanish-speaking staff member gives new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year a tour of the school if they have no English proficiency and introduced the students and parents to members of our school community such as the nurse, school secretaries, guidance counselor, etc. Also, two elementary school teachers speak Spanish and will welcome the parents and students and provide information about our school, answer questions parents might have, and inform parents of after-school offerings available for their students. There is also an ENL club designed for newcomers that meets once a week after school led by Spanish-speaking staff members where students are able to discuss their concerns and experiences with moving to a new location, learning a new language, and explore their own culture as well as the cultures of other ENL newcomers. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The school currently does not offer foreign language classes. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Our school does not offer a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teacher is provided with an on-going training through the PDs held at the school. In addition, the ENL teacher receives training by attending various workshops provided by DELLS. Topics covered: Designing Coherent Instruction; Using Data to Drive Instruction; Formative Assessment; Creating Rigorous 2018-19 RSCEP-R 79  Instruction; Integrating Successful Co-Teaching Model in the Classroom; Effective Questioning; Lesson Planning; Curriculum Mapping; Student Engagement; Workshop Model. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All staff members receive ongoing professional development regarding instruction for ELLs throughout the school year. The ENL teacher weekly attends common planning meetings across the grade levels and discusses issues and strategies with teachers regarding their ELL population. Additionally, the school has hired an ENL consultant form CITE to provide in-house professional development for staff. Also, during monthly staff meetings, grade level meetings, and vertical team meetings, teachers receive ongoing professional development on differentiation strategies to use for their ENL students. All the teachers in our school attend in-house PDs every Monday. Our teachers also started doing the inter-visitation (within the school and outside)so that they can share and exchange their teaching strategies, ideas, and experiences in order to grow professionally and implement new techniques in their teaching styles. The facilitators of the Monday PD's are the assistant principals, the literacy coach, the ENL coordinator, and the bilingual teacher. At this time, our school is working on the topics of the workshops for the content area teachers. Topics usually cover the needs of different categories of students, aligning our lessons to the Common Core Standards, developing reading comprehension strategies, and exploring ways to make instruction more effective. The ENL teacher also receives more than the minimum 7.5 hours of professional development annually through workshops offered through the NYC DOE Office of English Language Learners. Part of the workshops that the ENL teacher attends are geared towards aligning the lessons to Common Core Standards: incorporating non-fictional texts to develop reading comprehension, using evidence to support the claim, developing academic vocabulary, developing second language fluency by engaging in meaningful conversations, and demonstrating command of the second language by making oral presentations. The guidance counselor in our school receives information from high schools and colleges on trips that our students can take to visit them. She also conducts workshops on the weekend about transitioning to high schools. She also meets one-on-one with a parent to discuss different options for high school. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In the beginning of the year, the ENL teacher meets with the parents of ELL students to discuss the results of the spring NYSESLAT and the academic goals for the upcoming school year. Also, the ENL teacher hold annual workshops for the parents of ENL students to familiarize them with the strategies to use at home and help their students become successful learners. Flyers for the meetings will be translated into the parents' native language. Translation and interpretation will be provided with the help of bilingual school staff and the services of Translation and Interpretation Office. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The ENL teacher at our school conducts periodic workshops with the parents of ELL students. Besides that, the school offers evening ENL classes for the parents. Also, the school conducts various events for families, for example, Parents as Partners in Learning, Family Fun Nights, Community School Forum and Carnival, and Crayola Creativity Series. In addition, parents and guardians of the students who received a 100% attendance attend Broadway shows. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 80  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 81 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Keva Pitts-Girard, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 82  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS/IS 284 Gregory Jackson Scho School DBN: 23K284 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Keva Pitts-Girard Title Principal Keisha Ferguson Assistant Principal Janie Sanders Parent Coordinator Olga Naymushina ENL/Bilingual Teacher Shanell Curtis Parent Lesley Ann Olushoga, K teacher Teacher/Subject Area Nanette Fantauzzi, K teacher Teacher/Subject Area Jacqueline Reid N/A Coach Coach Keishaia Griffith School Counselor Miatheresa Pate Shirley Vargas Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Debra Pascall Other Speech SETSS Tessil Hobson Other SETSS N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 N/A 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-R 83  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 23K284 School Name: PS/IS284 Superintendent: Dr.Miatheresa The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Olga Naymushina ENL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At enrollment, all parents complete a language preference form for written and oral communication from the school. The preferences are recorded in ATS and on the school emergency cards. This data is then aggregated. Any communication sent home school-wide is sent in both English and the home language of the parents. In-house staff members are available to translate the letters into Spanish, which is the language other than English that a majority of our parents speak. Also, teachers and staff members are aware of bilingual English/Spanish staff members who are available to provide oral and written translation to parents. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 84 Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 463 0 4 2 83.27 0 0.72 0.36 458 1 4 2 82.37 0.18 0.72 0.36 English Arabic Urdu Mandinka (Mandingo) 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families PTC letters September 8, November 13, March 12, May 21 Report Cards September 13, November 15-16, March 14-15, May 23 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The Spanish speaking staff will assist with translating the documents into Spanish. For translation in Arabic and Urdu, the school will contact the Translation and Interpretation Office. In cases, when the school needs documents to be translated within a short period of time, the staff will contact the Big World company to ensure that parents receive important information in their preferred language. The Spanish speaking staff will assist with translating the documents into Spanish. For translation in Arabic and Urdu, the school will contact the Translation and Interpretation Office. In cases, when the school needs documents to be translated within a short period of time, the staff will contact the Big World company to ensure that parents receive important information in their preferred language. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 85 The Spanish speaking staff will assist with translating the documents into Spanish. For translation in Arabic and Urdu, the school will contact the Translation and Interpretation Office. In cases, when the school needs documents to be translated within a short period of time, the staff will contact the Big World company to ensure that parents receive important information in their preferred language. The Spanish speaking staff will assist with translating the documents into Spanish. For translation in Arabic and Urdu, the school will contact the Translation and Interpretation Office. In cases, when the school needs documents to be translated within a short period of time, the staff will contact the Big World company to ensure that parents receive important information in their preferred language. Thanksgiving Recess notification November 20 Winter Recess notification December 20 Midwinter Recess notification February 12 Spring Recess notification March 26 The school will also provide letters to the parents regarding field trips, enrichment programs, and testing calendar in their preferred language. In addition, in the beginning of each month, the school will send to the families the school monthly calendars. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent teacher Conferences September 13, November 15-16, March 14-15, May 23 School staff, community members or hired interpreters. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 86  ENL workshops for the parents September, December, March School staff, community members or hired interpreters. TBD N/A Also, the ENL teacher conducts parent-orientation meetings with the parents of newly enrolled students. N/A School staff, community members or hired interpreters. N/A 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of the school emergency, school staff will contact the Translation and Interpretation Office to assist with over the phone interpretation. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The school Language Access Coordinator will conduct a workshop to explain how school staff can use available resources to provide Limited English Speaking parents with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage 2018-19 RSCEP-R 87   Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school sends out flyers and notification letters in the language that is spoken at home. Parents are also invited to the workshops conducted by a teacher and interpreters. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In order to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. The school sends out a parent survey to indicate the areas of strength and those that need improvement. The school also obtains necessary information during the Open School Night/Family Night when the parents are encouraged to express their opinion about the quality of services needed. Translation and interpretation is provided at all times. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 88 
