 32K552 School Name: ACADEMY OF URBAN PLANNING Principal: JORGE SANDOVAL 2018-19 RSCEP-R 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information Academy of Urban Planning and Engineering 333200011552 9-12 400 Irving Ave, Brooklyn, NY 11237 School Number (DBN): 32K552 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: 718-381-7100 x 5209 Phone Number: 718-418-0314 Fax: Tamileth Foster tfoster7@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): 32 - Renewal HS Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Make the Road NY Jorge Sandoval Sonia Sendoya Patience Clemmons Adelice Lopez Nicole Card Theresa Flores Cristopher Zavala CalilaThree Coppin District Information Janice Ross Superintendent: 1396 Broadway, Room 110 Brooklyn, NY 11221 JRoss11@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-455-4635 Phone Number: 718-333-5656 Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 3  Brooklyn North FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 bfitzge@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-3068 Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with 2018-19 RSCEP-R 5  the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development 2018-19 RSCEP-R 6  The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure 2018-19 RSCEP-R 7  how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 8   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT x x x x x x Name Position and Constituent Group Jorge Sandoval Patience Clemmons Adelice Lopez Dale Donaldson Nicole Card Sonia Sentoya Christopher Zavela Kaitlyn Gordon Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 10 Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT x x x x x x Name Position and Constituent Group Natalie Pardo CalilaThree Coppin ZoilaArias Michael Schulman Pedro Sierra Sonya Lotmore Represented Staff Student Representative Parent Representative Staff Staff Parent Representative Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 RSCEP-R 11  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. The mission of the Academy of Urban Planning and Engineering is to build a community of leaders through academic and socioemotional support. We foster a spirit of advocacy to cultivate independent minds in pursuit of college and career readiness. We operate on the priorities of building community through diverse partnerships in urban planning and engineering. We select our partnerships based on the needs of our students which include student mentoring through AMG Mentoring and Stoked Mentoring. Both programs provide students with the opportunity to explore their career desires and work towards managing a plan to achieve their professional aspirations. In urban planning, we continue to partner with organizations that operate in public housing and social justice. We partner with Churches United for Fair Housing (CUFFH) by providing students with access to social justice curriculum and learning. Our central community partner is Make the Road NY, which operates on social justice and urban planning in the Bushwick community. Our students are provided with Restorative Justice workshops, Mental Health Services, access to Social Services and leadership programs such as student ambassadors, college coaches and more. In engineering, we partnered and will continue to partner with the Earth Institute that provides training and co-teaching to our Principles of Engineering teacher. The Earth Institute also provides resources for AUPE students to build and operate weather stations, Hydroponic lab and solar panels using coding and mechanical engineering. We believe our students learn best when they have access to multiple resources in the classroom and outside of the classroom. We believe in a balance of socioemotional and academic support systems. We have a large population of SIFE student in our ENL community and must provide additional supports to our SIFE students in order to graduate in four years. We provide additional Language Conversation courses in the afternoons for students entering in the new language. In addition, we provide ENL students with additional English support to improve ELA Regents’ Results. We provide all new parents with advance notice of our monthly PA meetings and survey parents to organize monthly workshops. We also provide social events for parents to attend which include painting workshops. This allows us to partner with our parents and families outside of the academic arena. In addition, we provide our parents with services in Yoga and Health Bootcamps during our Saturday program. Our Parent Coordinator serves as a point person to all of our parents. In our weekly Whole Child meetings, our teachers and guidance staff reach out to parents to attend upcoming events, open school nights or to meet with teacher teams to discuss academic expectations and next steps. Rigorous Instruction 2018-19 RSCEP-R 12  We are in year two of our Learning Partners Program and are working with two other high schools in a critical friends model of solving our instructional problem of practice. In year one, we wanted to increase our rigor in instruction and will now be addressing this problem of practice through the increase in co-planning and backward designs of Regents and AP Tasks emphasis on student constructed response questions. Supportive Environment We are partnered with Make the Road NY that provides our staff and students with Restorative Justice training that include Mindfulness and Conflict Resolution. We have decreased in overall Principal suspensions and negative in Superintendent suspensions. Our Community RJ Coordinator meets with our staff and students weekly in select classes including 9th grade courses to help students transition to high school expectations. In addition, we partnered with the FSC Student Collaborative Voice initiative and had a functional student council with goals to eliminate bullying and advocate for an increase in student clubs. Collaborative Teachers 60% of our classes are co-taught and teachers at AUPE continue to operate in co-planning for the sole purpose of increasing the rigor in our instruction. We partnered with LPP to support our initiatives and provide feedback to our co-planning and co-teaching at our school. Teacher meet four times a week as co-teachers and take part in weekly professional development to address data driven and student centered instruction. Effective School Leadership The Principal and AP work together with the Instructional Leadership Team to plan and implement new programming, school wide assessments, professional development, parent events and socioemotional supports. The Instructional Leadership Team is comprised of Model Teachers, UFT Representatives, LPP Model Teacher, AP and Peer Collaborative teacher. Each year we conduct inquiry cycles around MOTP results of our teachers. This past year we focused on improving results in assessment and feedback in our instruction. Strong Family-Community Ties We partner with our parents by conducting outreach to families by grades and invite families to various events including Summer Bridge Orientation, Open School Nights and Social events - painting workshops. We recently partnered with St. Nick’s Alliance as a provider in the Summer Youth Employment in 2018 and will continue to provide work study placement with businesses affiliated with St. Nick’s Alliance - Non-Profit organization. Our main community school partners, Make the Road, continue to partner with us in meeting our goals for the 2018-2019 academic year that include providing health and mental health services to our students and siblings, improve attendance and provide socioemotional support to our most vulnerable students. Trust Communication is key to building trust at AUPE. We continue to provide students with town hall meetings on a monthly basis which allows students to share concerns and learn more about upcoming events and major deadlines in each grade. In our School Leadership Team, we work together to decide on major decisions including admissions protocols and planning for anchor events. Through our mentoring programs, we foster respect and community where student ambassadors work with the Dean to help decrease bullying incidents and facilitate Restorative Justice circles. We provide morning ELT sessions in form of mentoring and college readiness. We will continue to provide AM Basketball Mentoring at 7am 2-3 times a week and Early College Dual Credit classes during our zero period. In addition, students will be scheduled with ELT tutoring classes in regents exams they have failed or yet to 2018-19 RSCEP-R 13  successfully pass. We will continue to offer tutoring courses in ELA, Algebra, Living Environment and History along with ESL classes and two mentoring programs during afternoon ELT sessions. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 32K552 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 197 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 13 14 1 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 8 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 4 School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 95.9% % Reduced Lunch 25.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 78.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.9 0% 27% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 72% 68% 80.8% 5.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 98 78 3 91.2% 2.5% 22.3% 17.8% 1.0% 1.0% 4 23% 5.9 N/A N/A 71% 71% 64.2% 11% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 RSCEP-R 15  2018-19 RSCEP-R 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 1 – We use castle learning to identify student weaknesses in content. In addition we administer mock regents and analyze the data to address student gaps. Writing strategies and task designed in our grade teams to ensure alignment to regents and deficiencies in writing. 2- In September, pre-align tasks, rubrics, protocols for early preparation for January and June NYS regents. 3.1. Teachers will meet weekly to analyze data from regents's exam results, mock regents and bench and post mark results and construct learning strategies that will address gaps to improve results. 3.2. Teachers will co-plan using backward design of a regents or AP exam task. 4- NYS Regents Red Reports, ISA, castle learning, content unit exams. Results from mock exams. Regents aligned assignments. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 17  If teachers implement coherent engaging tasks model interdisciplinary skills, foster collaboration and meet student socio-emotional needs, then students will demonstrate college and career readiness and become accountable and confident members of society. All students understand how they are being assessed. Student rubrics are aligned to NYS regents grading protocols. Using regents or AP aligned material students will engage in rigorous assignments. AIM and learning objectives will be focused around depth of knowledge 4 (four) level assignments. What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? If teachers implement coherent engaging tasks model interdisciplinary skills, foster collaboration and meet student socio-emotional needs, then students will demonstrate college and career readiness and become accountable and confident members of society. All students understand how they are being assessed. Student rubrics are aligned to NYS regents grading protocols. Using regents or AP aligned material students will engage in rigorous assignments. AIM and learning objectives will be focused around depth of knowledge 4 (four) level assignments. What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? We offer Six AP classes, CUNY LINCT program, Early Dual Credit Courses– Medgar Evers College, One Goal, College Summit, National Honors Society, Student Council & Model UN Program. What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? At AUPE, we follow the 5-30-10 model. Students will be introduced to the lesson then will have engage in an inquiry based student center lesson. The final seven to ten minutes will be used for assessment. How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? Provide students with multiple resources to improve rigorous reading and writing skills. Include scaffold readings for ELLs and SWDs. Allow students to provide responses to teacher feedback. This will help empower students to improve their learning habits. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? Provide students with diagnostic benchmarks on three classroom standards per semester driven by CCLS and NYC DOE standards. Provide students with MOCK Regents and Advanced Placement exams each semester. Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 18  Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) Diagnostic Formative Benchmark GATES MOCK Regents and AP Exam Pre & Post Standard Based Exams Part 3 – Annual Goal 9 10-12 9-12 Reading and Writing Levels Exam practice and individual action plans on content and skills Lesson revisions and progress on meeting CCLS and learning standards Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, the AUPE will meet Renewal Benchmarks with high rates of 70 and 75 in CC ELA and CC ALGEBRA Regents' Exam results. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve College and Career Preparatory Course index to 23% Attendance increase from 91.4% to 93% 2018-19 RSCEP-R 19  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Increase in Algebra and ELA regents results and improve constructed responses in all regents and AP exams. September 2018 - March - 2019 Weekly PD meetings and inquiry cycles will be led by ILT team consisting of 1 PCT, 3 Model Teacher, AP and Principal. All students with a a focus on ELLs and SWD students. Teachers will meet weekly to analyze data from regents's exam results, mock regents and bench and post mark results and construct learning strategies that will address gaps to improve results. Teachers will co-plan using backward design of a regents or AP exam task. All students. Increase regents results. September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers will meet with their co-teacher twice a week to backward plan unit maps. How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Using the August 2018 and Benchmark results, the ILT will identify the strategies teachers will implement to improve constructed responses. Mock Regents results in November 2018 will indicate if strategies are improving regents results. Classroom observation results will indicate use of backwards design. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During our whole child meetings scheduled for Tuesdays 6th period, grade teams will reach out to parents to discuss student progress and cover expectations. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 20  Grade teams will also invite parents in to review classroom expectations. During open school nights, parents will receive literature on classroom expectations, standards and details about exam preparation and deadlines. Monthly Parent Association meetings will include review of the progress of our classroom instruction. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. Classroom space and per session pay for teachers and a supervisor are needed to implement Extended Learning Time. This will be funded with Tax Levy and Priority/Focus money. Supplemental instructional materials will also be needed to support teachers of ELT. This may be funded by Title III for ENL students and by Priority/Focus for other subgroups. Instructional coaching will be expanded for the 2017-2018 school year. Collaborative team teachers will continue to benefit from the guidance of an instructional coach, but new teachers will also receive coaching whether or not they are part of a collaborative team in the classroom. This will require the hiring of at least two instructional coaches, depending on content areas. These coaches will be paid through Renewal School funding and Priority/Focus set-aside. The programmer and senior counselor will need per session pay to ensure appropriate students are provided the opportunity to contribute to the College and Career Preparatory Course Index. This will be funded with Tax Levy money. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Eligible students will be enrolled in spring semester College Now courses at Medgar Evers College. This will progress to students earning a B or higher in said College Now courses as targeted by their Guidance Counselor. Eligible students will be enrolled in AP courses in September with an increase in the number of courses offered, and ongoing PD will occur for teachers who teach these courses. These students will progress to earning a 3+ in said AP courses. Instructional coaches and Peer Collaborative Teacher will meet with their rosters of teachers at least twice a month and develop progress monitoring reports to document each session. ELT will meet daily and maintain attendance rates of at least 80%. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Leadership will conduct one on one meetings with teachers to discuss scholarship data, Skedula checks (student progress reports) and ELT/Saturday School attendance and learning goals. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and x SOP(s) Addressed sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 1. AUPE has established a system of progressive and restorative justice in dealing with student socio emotional issues and behavior issues using Campus RJ coordinator and Dean interventions. Our RJ Coordinator works in harmony with our Dean to address student concerns and student outbursts. Our Mental Health Clinicians are available to assist the RJ Coordinator, Dean and Guidance Counselors when a student is a higher need of assistance. We have a social worker who also serves as a mediator and counselor for our students with the highest needs. Academically, we have experienced ELA teachers along with high classroom expectations provide rigorous instruction to our students. Students receive tutoring aferschool during ELT and during our Saturday School programs which are aligned with Yoga and Bootcamp Workshops. 2. Additional support for our students are always beneficial. One of the areas in high need is our work program that needs more organizing to help provide students with jobs and internships. We are currently operating a SYEP Provider Program and hope to continue it throughout the year with the additional support of Make the Road NY and St. Nick's Alliance. 3. 1. Provide additional training in Restorative Justice to new teachers and student leaders. 3.2. Provide parents with training in Restorative Justice to address adolescent behaviors and empower the Parent Association members to take part in RJ circles for students and staff. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 22  3.3. Train Student Council members in RJ practices and peer mediation to help take part in RJ circles for students and staff. 4. In addition, to RJ practices and Yoga Mindfulness workshops in ELT, teachers will meet weekly to discuss student progress by looking at the whole child from social to academic issues. Teachers and Counselors will conduct outreach to bring parents to meet with teachers and discuss students' progress and provide resources to support the students' socio emotional state and academic excellence. 5. Our staff conducted a workshop where we review the Student Perception and NYC School Survey reports that show we are a very tight and loving community but can use more peer mediation and involvement to improve behavior and safety in classrooms. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? The whole child is supported by teachers, support staff, CBO staff, guidance counselors, Mental Health Clinicians, administration and CBO partners that include Mentoring Programs along with Extended Learning Time to prepare students for regents and AP exams. My vision is that every child, regardless of their economic status, have access to the Principal, APs, Parent Coordinator, Counselors, Social Worker, Dean, Teachers, Paras, Secretaries and Mental Health Clinicians. From this access, they are provided with counseling, mentoring, services ranging from eyeglasses, dental, legal services and support for their health. Parents will be involved by taking part in monthly trainings and state of the school meetings. Towhall meetings will be provided by grade monthly and parents will be invited to Professional Development days to learn with the teachers and staff. All with the vision that we are building communities of learners with access to services. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner Make the Road Provide social services for families and students in need (ELL & SWD through ELT, students in temporary housing and more) CBO Focus CUFFH Provide mentoring and social justice training to our students. DOH Mental Health Clinic AMG Mentoring Provide social emotional therapy to students in need of additional services at the school. Provide groups of students interested in the music industry with mentors active in various musical occupations. Stoked Mentoring Provide groups of students interested in skateboarding and designing a line of clothing by mentors in the various fields of skateboarding and branding. How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? All partners will be invited to meet our new students and families and will be part of our monthly Tuesday - all staff meetings to discuss progress and house keeping issues. All students get access to services via the Guidance Counselor or Teacher who will refer students to Make the Road NY and will then be serviced. Part 3 – Annual Goal 2018-19 RSCEP-R 23  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, SWDs & ELLs will receive an increase in social emotional and academic enrichment services which will result in a Regents Completion Rate 31.4%, as seen in the School Quality Guide. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Supportive Environment Index Increase in School Report Card 2018-19 RSCEP-R 24  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Provide additional training in Restorative Justice to new teachers and student leaders. Provide parents with training in Restorative Justice to address adolescent behaviors and empower the Parent Association members to take part in RJ circles for students and staff. Train Student Council members in RJ practices and peer mediation to help take part in RJ circles for students and staff. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Supportive Environment New Teachers and Student Leaders September 2018 - June 2019 Administration and Make the Road NY RJ Coordinator will be responsible supervision How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase involvement of students and teachers in RJ circles. 60% of SLT members will be trained in Restorative Justice by June 2019. Supportive Environment Students with additional social-emotional needs. Student Leaders Supportive Environment September 2018 - June 2019 Administration and Make the Road NY RJ Coordinator will be responsible supervision September 2018 - June 2019 Administration, Student Council Advisor and Make the Road NY RJ Coordinator will be responsible supervision Creation of a Student Team of peer mediators. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Provide monthly trainings for parents in RJ practices - RJ Coordinator and PC Teacher Grade Teams will meet weekly to discuss student issues and progress using a whole child approach. This is on going. Conduct RJ circles to include parents, staff, teachers and students. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 RSCEP-R 25  Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Renewal school funding will pay for the services provided through Make the Road NY, Stoked Mentoring, AMG Mentoring, ELT and CUFFH services. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Regents passing rates in January 2019 must be at least 35% overall. Scholarship data for each core subject area and physical education is used to measure progress with student obtaining 4.5 credits by January 2019 and a minimum of 10 credits by June 2019 in the core subject areas, physical education and an elective credit. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Scholarship Reports Regents Passing Rates AYP ELA and Math Increased Attendance to 93% Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: x SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 1. Data Driven Instruction has been our push during the 2017-2018 school year with some success we achieved higher pass rates in Algebra, Living Environment and Global Studies. ELA and US History exam results had little increases. Our Data teams consisted of grade team members who worked together to dive in data results from August Regents, Mock Regents, January Regents and June Regents. We included use of online summative reports in departments through castlelearning.com and Delta Math. 2. With five (5) new teachers, we will need to plan year 2 of our shift to data driven instruction and conduct data dives to get all teachers familiar with data and promote data literacy and include parents, students and counselors. 3.1. Conduct student data inquiry cycles using August regents and mock regents results during weekly PD Teacher Meetings. 3.2. Teachers will improve data driven instruction by creating learning tasks and skill share resulting from data inquiry circles. 3.3. Teachers will share progress of data of driven instruction by reassessing students after skill shares. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 27 Collaborative teaching begins in the co-planning session and will take place four times a week. It continues in the classroom where teachers use station, parallel, team and alternative teaching to provide all students the opportunity to learn and grow to improve regents and AP exam results. How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? Our ILT (Instructional Leadership Team) consists of subject teachers, PCT, Model Teachers and APs. ILT members will meet bi-weekly and conduct an inquiry cycle around co-teaching/collaborative teaching visiting classrooms using tennis charts and next steps to improve co-teaching and instruction. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? On Tuesdays PD, teachers will conduct student data inquiry cycles in grades and departments using data to improve instruction. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Student data inquiry cycles will produce the creation of learning tasks and skills share that will be implemented in the classrooms with results observed and gathered for review. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Data Reviewed Intent Regents ISA Reports Review areas where students are not excelling and provide next steps for students and teachers. Mock Regents Results Review areas where students are not performing and losing the most points to successfully pass the regents. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, we will have a 15% increase in regents pass rates. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Increase Regents Pass Rates. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 28  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Conduct student data inquiry cycles using August regents and mock regents results during weekly PD Teacher Meetings. Teachers will improve data driven instruction by creating learning tasks and skill share resulting from data inquiry circles. Teachers will share progress of data driven instruction by reassessing students after skill shares. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers Collaborative Teaching September 2018-June 2019 ILT Members Teachers Collaborative Teaching September 2018-June 2019 Administration, department team leaders Teachers & Students Collaborative Teaching September 2018-June 2019 ILT members Grade Teams How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Improvement in Mock and January Regents results. Student increases and decreases in Writing task during Midterms and Finals and Regents Performances. Grade Team members will discuss how students progressed by reassessing the regents task and skills. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will provide families with regents result data during our October meetings and share with them the data driven instructional shifts. Parent Coordinator and Principal will be presenting data and answering questions. Peer Collaborative Teacher will be involved in making sure all of our parents are informed about their progress. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 RSCEP-R 29  Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher teams will use allocated PD time to achieve these goals. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Teacher team meetings will be monitored through the submission of meeting minutes and/or agenda. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student Inquiry cycle reports and assessment results will be used to assess progress. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? `1. Our Instructional Leadership Team is strong and organized. Our focus is to raise regents and AP exam pass rates and credit accumulation rates. We do this by reviewing student data and teacher instructional shifts to address gaps in exam pass rates. The ILT organizes and implements all PD and Inquiry cycles with teachers and staff. 2. Having a number of new teachers, we will need more new teacher mentoring and workshops on data driven instruction. 3.1. ILT will conduct observation rounds on Regents Task/Backwards Design in all classrooms. 3.2. ILT will provide observation reports at weekly PD meetings and develop next steps for grade team and department teams. 3.3. ILT will participate in Learning Partners inter-visitation cycles to address co-planning for rigorous tasks to increase regents and AP exam pass rates. 4. Regents Results, Quality Review and IIT. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership 2018-19 RSCEP-R 31 What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? Provide teachers with the resources and professional development to shift instruction that improves student success. On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? I will be focusing on making sure I model and learn from teachers by visiting classrooms more often and partner with my teachers to provide rigorous instruction. What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? Our school uses a 5, 30, 10 Student at the Center Instruction using data. This includes students engaged in writing, thinking, speaking, reading and collaborating in all classrooms. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? Each year, we have teachers serve as grade team leaders and department heads. In addition, we will have two model teachers and Peer Collaborative Teacher who will lead collaborative inquiry with new teachers and teachers on a TIP. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? We will continue to strengthen our School Leadership Team with additional parents, students and teachers. How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy Twice a week Within 5 days One on one and via email. What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Pre and Post Assessments per Marking Period PCT Grade Team Members Model Teachers Department Team Members WIT APs Admin WIT - Renewal Coaches 2018-19 RSCEP-R 32  How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? Provide a prep period for teachers to meet four times a week as co-teachers. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, school leadership will collaborate with all stakeholders to build the capacity of teacher team leaders to lead inquiry work that results in a 83% 4-year graduation rate, as seen in the School Quality Guide. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Increase professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 33  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. The ILT will conduct observation rounds on Regents Task/Backwards Design in all classrooms. The ILT will provide observation reports at weekly PD meetings and develop next steps for grade and department teams. The ILT will participate in Learning Partners inter-visitation cycles to address co-planning for rigorous tasks to increase regents and AP exam pass rates. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers Increase Regents Pass Rates. ILT members September 2018-June 2019 Teachers Increase Rigorous Instruction ILT Members September 2018-June 2019 Teachers Increase Collaborative Teaching and Rigorous Instruction September 2018 - June 2019 ILT Members How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in writing strategies across grades and increase in rigor. Increase MOTP rates in Engagement, Discussion and Assessment Increase in purposeful co-planning and co-teaching. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Provide Parents with newsletters on the progress of the ILT. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ILT members will have allocated funds from LPP, Teacher Leadership and teacher coverages. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 34  X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Our goals will be measured on a monthly basis during LPP meetings and ILT meetings. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Co-planning data and co-teaching observation notes. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 35  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 6.5 Our School Leadership Team includes parents, students, teachers and CBO to meet monthly to discuss the progress of our school scholarship reports, understand the use of data as a renewal school and review the CBO services that serve our students. Additionally, the Community School Team meets monthly to review ongoing projects and launch new initiatives to benefit the campus educational community. Parents, students, and community members are invited to this meeting as a way to incorporate more voices and to address needs of all students. Because the Community School Director has a new data tool from the New Visions program, the community school office is another place that parents can gather academic and attendance data on their students. The community school office is monitoring student attendance and its effect on credit accumulation. It is an accessible source through which parents and families can monitor student progress. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? The Community School director maintains a space on the first floor of the building that serves as a welcoming and inviting space to attract the participation of parents and families. Here, parents and families can access services beyond academics. If families are comfortable seeking help from the CBO, they will be more comfortable visiting AUPE and taking an active role in their students’ education. Advertising for community school events is done campus wide by way of posted signs and email blasts. Each school also contributes Youth Ambassadors who are charged with keeping their respective student populations abreast of community school activities and initiatives. All school staff, including school 2018-19 RSCEP-R 36  safety agents, are aware of the community school space and refer students and families there for needs beyond the scope of the individual schools. AUPE will continue to offer anchor activities and celebrations aimed at bringing in family members. The school hopes to see an increase in parent engagement through community events held at the school and at the Bushwick Campus. Workshops for parents will be expanded to include data and progress report information to help parents navigate the data-driven climate of schools. To advertise the community school resources, the start of the school year will feature a community school kick-off, which is sponsored by the CBO, and invites all community members to participate in a picnic and table fair to share available resources. Throughout the school year all parent events and open houses will make mention of the community school resources to entice parent participation. During open school nights, the community school office will remain open to share their work and recruit parents to join upcoming events. Adult education is an area of desired improvement for AUPE. The hope is that low turnout among our parents for adult education can be offset by partnering with the other schools under the community school umbrella to forge a larger cohort of parents participating. The support of the community school should also afford additional resources with which to offer said courses. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? Provide families with a welcome back event in collaboration with Make the Road. Parents will be invited to participate in workshops led by Community School staff on how to improve parent meetings and associations. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? Recruit parents for our School Leadership Team and Parent Association. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? Increase parent up events to the school to meet with teachers and administration. What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale Online grade through Skedula Parents can log in to see their child's grades Parent UP events Bring parents in to visit classrooms and attend cultural celebrations. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 37  How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Parent meetings take place with the Guidance Counselor and teachers along with the Parent Coordinator. Family partnerships with CBO: Make the Road will hold community school parent meetings. Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Yes. 510 and room 138. What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? Continue to promote English courses non English speakers and GED programs held at the campus for parents. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? Data will include parent attendance and parent feedback during workshops. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2018, the increase in parent involvement for school-wide activities will result in an increase in student attendance from 88% to 90.5% which exceeds the Renewal Schools benchmark for 2016-17. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Provide more resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 38  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator Parents, Students, Teachers, and CBO Provide more resources from the community into the school building School Leadership Team will be provided with school scholarship reports and workshops on how to read reports. Results of the school survey from last year will also be shared with parents as they contributed to its results. Parents are also privy to data through the CBO. The New Visions tool helps our CBO manage the current attendance information and to identify at risk cases. The CBO can share this information with parents in order to facilitate conversations regarding student performance or student progress. How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in parent participation in SLT and Parent Association meetings Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Make the Road will use Renewal School funding to launch initiatives and events that will attract parent/family participation. Student government and other student led events will require Tax Levy money for supplies and teacher/supervisor per session when events and their planning occur beyond contractual hours. Should the PTA organize events, they may use PA funding. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title I TA Title III X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding 2018-19 RSCEP-R 39  Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Monthly attendance averages should be 90% by January 2018. Tracked attendance and anecdotal data for all parent engagement events and ELT attendance data will be reviewed by January 2018. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. RISA reports and RCUA reports. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 40  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. The ELT will blend school staff with community partners to provide a balanced curriculum to all students, targeting ELLs and SWDs, which will increase the school-wide scholarship rate from 75% to 80% by June 2019 providing Regents prep and AP prep to students who are enrolled in classes that end in these high stakes exams and provide blended learning opportunities for students in need of additional credits. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? X Voluntary Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. The ELT program for regents preparation will serve students who are identified by their teachers as needing additional services. Students identified will receive in-class incentives towards their grade for participating in ELT. Students’ parents and families will be notified and a partnership between families and teachers along with the Guidance Counselor/ Social Worker will help to ensure student attendance. Physical education program participation on Fridays will be determined by ELT attendance. Students seeking to participate in extracurricular activities would have to get clearance from ELT teachers before their participation in these activities takes place. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 41   What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? ELT opportunities serve as a regents and homework help for the purpose of academic enrichment. This program identifies students by their content area teachers. ELLs and SWDs are the targeted population. Teachers will, by department, determine which students will participate in ELT and provide customized work for their students. Due to the individualized aspect of learning in ELT, students are given more opportunities for one to one assistance. In some content areas like, math and ELA, more than one teacher is present. As students work independently on topics, the two teachers are able to circulate and sit with students to provide assistance and the social emotional encouragement needed for students who often struggle academically. Professional development is delivered through workshops offered to the staff from the Renewal Office or other NYCDOE programs. WITSi trainings are attended throughout the school year, and AVID workshops are heavily attended with the intent of eventually having every teacher exposed to and using the AVID model. Teachers who teach ELT will service a range of grades, 9 – 12, but the classroom teachers in the department will submit by Google Docs and/or email the customized work for each student. Communication between the subject area teacher teaching in ELT and their colleagues will occur weekly to create a succinct list of student whose attendance in ELT is mandatory. When students finish their requirement, an updated list in Google Docs will show proof that the student attended and/or completed their assignment. This running log online will afford the students’ teacher instant feedback concerning attendance and completion. Students who are given clearance from all departments, may be able to participate in extracurricular activities which this upcoming year will be Opening Act and Arts in Bushwick in addition to attending Physical Education classes in the school’s gymnasium after school on Fridays. Stoked Mentoring, CUFFH and AMG Mentoring classes are conducted by a content area teacher with a teaching artist to support the work. Students with low attendance and low credit accumulation are targeted for these courses by the CBO in order to boost attendance overall. The impetus behind this program is exposing students to courses not traditionally offered during the school day, such as martial arts, film-making, and vocal lessons. The CBO advertised these courses through informational sessions specifically targeted to students meeting the low attendance and low credit accumulation criteria. Once those spots are filled, additional available seats are open to all students who express interest and commit to attending the regular schedule of classes. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 42  Administration keeps abreast of the overall attendance and quality of instruction for ELT and Blended Learning classes. Admin monitors the Google Docs and Skedula/Pupilpath to ensure that attendance and assignments are entered and students are completing their assignments. The day to day maintenance and oversight of each department is the responsibility of each department leader. The leader maintains that the student list via Google Doc Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. ELT begins : September 28 th 2018 and ends June 15 th , 2019 for after school and PM activities. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Seven certified teachers will cover within their specified content area math, ELA, ESL, history and living environment, physics and physical education. Each subject will take place twice a week. Students will use a combination on online and textbook resources. The students will be able to take classes after their last class and on Saturday as well as during Winter, Mid-Winter and Spring Breaks. According to the teachers’ schedule, teachers will teach between 2 to 4 periods a week. One supervisor is needed. ELT After school hours 8 teachers *$44.11* 2 days * 26 weeks of school = $ 17463.68(minimally) OR 8 teachers *$44.11* 4 days * 26 weeks of school = $ 34,927.36(maximum cost) Saturday School 8 teachers *$44.11* 26 weeks of school * 3 hours= $26,195.52 Winter Break/Mid-Winter Recess? Spring Break/(4 days for each) 12 days * 8 teachers * 6 hours* $44.11 = $24180.48 Supervisor Cost- ELT after school and Saturday $53* 13 hours* 26weeks = 17,914 Winter Break/Mid-Winter Recess/Spring Break/(4 days for each) 53*12 days* 6 hours = 3,816 Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X X Tax Levy Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 43  Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks By February 2019, school scholarship will increase by 5% across all subject areas as a result of student attendance of ELT programs. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Success rates of students attending ELT. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 44  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. Our Community School Program's goals will be to provide academic and socioemotional support to all of our students at AUPE through the services of our Community School Partner, Make the Road NY and partnerships with Department of Health. Students will receive services that cover eye care, dental care and mental health therapy. In addition, students will have access to a new Health Clinic. All of our students have access to academic supports ranging from Extended Learning Time to Saturday School academies. Students will have access to the Student Success Center and receive extra support in college readiness attending workshops in navigating the college application process to determine the best financial aid package. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Make the Road NY Students Restorative Justice Training Make the Road NY Students Interboro Mental Health Students Churches United for Fair Housing (CUFFH) Make the Road NY Students Students Mindfulness Workshops Extended Learning Time teachers and Tutors Provide mental health services to students in need. Provide students with social justice training and leadership development. Provide students with social justice training and leadership development. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 45 Stoked Mentoring Students AMG Mentoring Students Make the Road NY Students and Families Provide mentoring for students in 9th and 10th grades using skateboarding activities and entrepreneur training. Provide mentoring for students in 11th and 12th grades using music industry projects and entrepreneur training. Provide "Know Your Rights" workshops to parents and students. Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. Our Community School Director (CSD), Sonia Sendoya, has been working on campus for Make the Road New York since 2018. She has been the CSD since Jan. 2018. Sonia, the Assistant CSD, Community Engagement Coordinator, and the Youth Ambassadors will implement our annual asset and needs assessment process through focus groups and one on one meetings with staff and students, surveys, community school team meetings, and our community school forum. Sonia will convene quarterly community school provider meetings with other CBO’s and guidance staff to ensure that clear communication and a streamlined coordination of services is happening. As we enter our fourth full year as a community school, the programs and activities outlined in Section 2/part 2a and in our SMART goals section are based on a thorough and ongoing assets and needs assessment process and are a description of other programming that will be in place to strengthen the initiative. We use a mix of quantitative and qualitative data analysis to ensure the rights students are receiving the right supports. For example, we use the data sorter to filter for a specific attendance trend, then go student by student and have counselors, administration, and CBO staff who know each student give their input as to the challenges the student is facing and ideas for support. We will seamlessly coordinate services by convening regular meetings with school leadership and staff as well as partner CBO's in the building – to ensure all are on the same page, referral processes are understood, and a clear schedule is put in place. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 46  The CSD and Community Engagement Coordinator will convene monthly community school team meetings. The Restorative Justice Coordinator will coordinate monthly community building circles. The Youth Ambassadors will coordinate monthly community building events. Our Student Success Center Staff will offer quarterly parent workshops on financial aid and the college process. To get families to these meetings Youth Ambassadors will facilitate workshops in the classrooms and conduct outreach in the lunchroom, and then facilitate one on ones with interested students. MRNY Community Engagement Coordinator will train parent leaders in outreach and organizing. Those leaders will then make phone calls, do door knocking, and facilitate one on ones with interested parents. Community School Director and current team members will outreach to staff and facilitate one on ones with interested staff. We will offer leadership training for parents with Make the Road New York and the Coalition for Educational Justice. We will connect parents to English classes and workshops to develop skills. Our Community Engagement Coordinator will have one on one sessions with parents to discuss goals and strategies to support their students. They will connect parents to teachers when necessary. Our Youth Advocate will also connect with parents of students on her cohort and invite parents to the school (or do home visits when necessary) to set goals along with their child and sit in on classes from time to time to understand better what the students are learning. The Principal and the CSD check in one on one several times a week, and meet along with the other three Principals in the building every other week for a longer meeting to discuss the campus community school strategy. Our attendance team meets weekly and actively uses the New Visions data sorter to track attendance trends and progress of targeted students. Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. In addition to Make the Road New York, the following CBO’s and individuals are active and engaged partners in the community school strategy at our school: Stoked Mentoring (AUPE only - ELT – students build skateboards and receive support from a mentor), One Goal (AUPE only - college access class), Interborough (mental health services), RAPP Counselor (mental health – relationship abuse prevention), Little Flower Yoga (yoga and mindfulness), an African Drumming teaching artist and a Cuban dance teaching artist – AUPE only, Peer Health Exchange (health and mental health workshops for 9th grade students), SMILE NY Dental, and VOLS (monthly legal clinic), Opening Act (theater workshops), and Office of Adult and Continuing Education (Adult ESL classes). We also offer tutoring during renewal hour in the four core subject areas. We have programs in swimming, dance and a Step team (AEL only). Three focus areas for our CSD this year are restorative justice, connecting every community school staff and intern to a cohort of chronically absent students, and college access. 2. Our community school team is made up of students, staff, and parents from the four schools on campus. All are welcome and will be invited, but at a minimum we will have 1 Assistant Principals, 1 Parent Coordinator, 8 Youth Ambassadors, 4 teachers, and 4 parents. Meetings will be facilitated by the CSD and each month will focus on a different area of the community school strategy. We will give updates on work in that area, look at data, and brainstorm ideas and areas for improvement. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 47  3. As noted above, our attendance team meets weekly and actively uses the data sorter as well as ATS to monitor and analyze attendance trends. We also use the data sorter to address credit gaps and graduation planning. We use a mix of quantitative and qualitative data analysis to ensure the rights students are receiving the right supports. For example, we use the data sorter to filter for a specific attendance trend, then go student by student and have counselors, administration, and CBO staff who know each student give their input as to the challenges the student is facing and ideas for support. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Resources needed are funding for staffing, supplies, events, food, and incentives. Schedule adjustments must be made to allow for a restorative justice class and time to facilitate restorative justice circles. Time in classrooms for college access work must also be allocated. Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Our community school strategy is ongoing. Each fiscal year runs July 1st to June 30th. Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 48  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Teacher of student identifies student based on formative and summative assessments. The counselor and parent confirms their attendance Teacher of student identifies student based on formative and summative assessments. The counselor and parent confirms their attendance Teacher of student identifies student based on formative and summative assessments. The counselor and parent confirms their attendance Teacher of student identifies student based on formative and summative assessments. The counselor and parent confirms their attendance Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Blended/online Learning, graphic organizers, scaffold assignments, online tutorials, Plato Online Learning, Blended/online Learning, graphic organizers, scaffold assignments, online tutorials, Plato Online Learning. Blended/online Learning, graphic organizers, scaffold assignments, online tutorials, Plato Online Learning, Blended/online Learning, graphic organizers, scaffold assignments, online tutorials, Plato Online Learning, Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group tutoring, peer tutoring, Khan Academy, Castle Learning and regentsprep.com ELT at end of each school day or Saturday school Small group tutoring, peer tutoring, Castle Learning and regentsprep.com ELT at end of each school day or Saturday school Small group tutoring, peer tutoring, Castle Learning and regentsprep.com ELT at end of each school day or Saturday school Small group tutoring, peer tutoring, Castle Learning and regentsprep.com ELTat end of each school day or Saturday school 2018-19 RSCEP-R 49 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Subject area teacher provides academic assistance and Counselor and/or Social Worker provides social emotional support Subject area teacher provides academic assistance and Counselor and/or Social Worker provides social emotional support Subject area teacher provides academic assistance and Counselor and/or Social Worker provides social emotional support Subject area teacher provides academic assistance and Counselor and/or Social Worker provides social emotional support during mandated counseling sessions, advisory periods, or as needed 2018-19 RSCEP-R 50  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 22 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Care packages are provided by Make the Road NY and students who are in shelters receive additional help through ELT and Saturday School. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 51  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-R 52  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The administration made a concerted effort to interview for vacancies earlier than last year. The principal has been screening potential candidates for the following school year beginning in April, rather than waiting until the summer. This has been made possible by maintaining trust and amicable relations with current teachers. Teachers have given earlier notice about their intention to leave the school, thereby allowing administration to plan for a replacement rather than forcing administration to fill the vacancy at the last minute. Our partnership with the Hunter College -Graduate School of Education allows us to have student teachers in our classrooms which also provide an avenue for teacher recruitment. Each student teacher is paired with a teacher as their coach and learning how our school operates. This has conversely allowed our administration to observe these new teachers and to consider them for possible openings in the coming school year. For continuing teachers, preference sheets were distributed to teachers for the upcoming school year. Programming decisions will be based upon these preferences when possible. High quality professional development is important to the current leadership so AP teachers are attending AP Summer Institutes. In addition, a group of teacher will attend LPP training, Medgar Evers Summer Institute, Algebra 4 All and College Access 4 All workshops. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers will be attending AP Summer Institute Trainings to teach AP US History. Current AP teachers will attend workshops on their content and the alignment to the CCSS. The English departments will continue to meet with instructional coaches who help align curricula to CCSS. In department meetings, these teachers will analyze the new Common Core aligned state regents’ exams to become familiar with standards addressed. They will be encouraged to use actual Regents and AP Exam questions in their lessons to guide student practice in preparation for these exams. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 53  Social Studies will receive training in the use of the New Visions Global and US curriculums. Over the summer, a group of teachers and the Assistant Principal will take part in a one week training session on creating a college going environment for our students geared to understanding the CCSS and work in partnership with the Renewal Office. Math department will attend Algebra 4 All training workshops. Paraprofessionals will take part in a half a day session during professional development day in September to discuss job descriptions, explore the Common Core Learning Standards and construct strategies on how to engage with their students with disabilities. These sessions will continue every two weeks during common planning hours and afterschool PDs. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Departmentally, teachers meet to consider common subject-area assessments. Because our students take the Regents exams for culminating assessments, teachers are strategically assigned to Regents grading as a way to aid their professional development in understanding the exams and their rubrics. The ENL and ELA department has adopted Lexia as a supplemental and assessment tool. Professional development for Lexia is included in the purchased package from the vendor. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its 2018-19 RSCEP-R 54  Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 339,933.00 16,979 65,496 0 11,200.00 13,000 1,962,607.00 Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent 2018-19 RSCEP-R 55  and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 56  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Academy of Urban Planning & Engineering, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Academy of Urban Planning and Engineering will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 57  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 58  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Academy of Urban Planning and Engineering, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 2018-19 RSCEP-R 59  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 60  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 RSCEP-R 61  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 62  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 63  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 RSCEP-R 64  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our Saturday academy and Extended Learning Time courses service 52 ELL students of grades 9-12. The rationale for holding a Saturday academy and an Extended Learning Time course is the low performance of ELL students on the ELA Regents exam. Thirty-four (34) of 52 ELL students have not yet passed the exam with a 65 or higher. Since this exam cannot be taken in their native language, our ELL students need extra support to achieve a passing score. This exam is a barrier to promotion to the next grade level as well as a barrier to graduation. We believe offering our students more time to participate in enriching activities will help to solidify knowledge leading to better academic performance. These classes are conducted in English with modified materials to offer translation as well as the use of English/Spanish dictionaries. The materials used to support our ELL students in the Saturday academy and during Extended Learning Time are a combination of teacher-constructed activities that support the regular classroom work as well as classroom work with which students need more support. Both ELA and math classroom work is aligned to EngageNY. Classroom assignments that may be used in Saturday or ELT programs include essay writing, lab reports, homework help, or organizational literacy to build student study skills. Students who need homework help are using daily instructional material, but students who are current in their coursework are offered supplemental materials. These may be teacher-made or enrichment work from DOE approved vendors like Plato, Castle Learning, Rewards, and Think Through Math.The Saturday academy occurs each Saturday from October 6 to December 15. The dates are as follows: October 6, 13, 20, 27, Nov. 3, 10, 17, Dec. 1, 8, 15. This totals 10 sessions. The program hours are 9am -12pm. Every 45 minutes, students change subject areas. At each session there are 5 groups of 10-12 students, and one subject-area certified teacher from the following: math, ELA, ENL, history, and science; there are 5 teachers total. Students are serviced at a ratio of 10 students to 1 teacher, and the ENL teacher supports all subject areas. All teachers utilize small group instruction during these sessions. Grade levels are mixed 9-12 in these sessions. Extended Learning Time will offer courses in ENL and ELA targeting beginning ENL students, though all level of ENL students are welcome, to practice speech in English. Twenty-five students are serviced by one ENL certified teacher. ENL/ELA extended learning time is offered every Monday and Friday throughout the school year (September 5 to June 26), and other content areas are offered on Wednesday and Thursday. Classes are 48 minutes in duration (2:45-3:35PM). There are 120 ELT sessions scheduled. ENL teachers will use small, flexible group instruction during ELT. Extended Learning Time appears on students' programs. Thus weekly attendance sheets are generated and scanned. The Saturday program attendance is taken by hand, and advertising for the Saturday program is done through phone calls and letters to the home (in English and Spanish) as well as announcements at each school function. Attendance records for both programs are maintained by the pupil personnel secretary. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 65  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: To support our ENL teachers in their professional growth, we are participating in inter-visitation cycles with co-located schools on the Bushwick High School Campus as well as with partner schools in a Learning Partners Program. Through these visits, our ENL teachers will have the opportunity to observe other ENL classrooms and teachers. The purpose is to learn from observation as well as to receive feedback from colleagues when hosting visits at our school. Each visit will have a focus related to how ENL teachers can best serve their students. Of particular interest for our teachers is how stand-alone ENL courses can support our ELL students in mastering the ELA Regents exam. Our two ENL teachers, Ms. Helmig and Ms. Moore, will participate in the inter-visitation one day per month from October to May. Funding will provide substitute teachers for our ENL classes when Ms. Helmig and Ms. Moore are participating in inter-visitation. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: All parents are invited to participate in a variety of workshops to service all aspects of a student. Monthly hour-long worskhops are held with the help of our Community School Partner - Make the Road NY, Opportunities for a Better Tomorrow, Churches United for Fair Housing, Volunteers of Legal Service, and Zumba Classes. Workshop topics have included FAFSA information and application, Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals information, applying for public housing, legal help, and promoting fitness. The schedule of workshops (6-7:30PM) is as follows: November 13, 2018 Internet Safety Workshop--Michael Reilly November 6, 13, 20, 2018 Connecting with your child--Make the Road NY December 11, 2018 Relationship of parent, teacher, students - Dale Donaldson, parent coordinator January 8, 2019 Skedula/PupilPath - Dale Donaldson, parent coordinator February 12, 2019 NYCDOE Family Access - Dale Donaldson March 12, 2019 Computer Literacy - Make the Road 2018-19 RSCEP-R 66  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities April 23, 2019 Financial Literacy - Make the Road May 7, 2019 - PTA/SLT Workshop for elections - Dale Donaldson June 4, 2019 PTA/SLT elections Translation is available either through the workshop presenter or a school staff member. Zumba is offered to parents of ENL students on Saturdays during the school year to help promote fitness and well-being. All parents, including parents of ELLs, are notified of these activities through dual language backpacked fliers, mailings to home, emails, and text messages. Helping parents navigate the college application process, financial aid system, and legal hurdles for those without documentation gives all students the opportunity to receive an education and provides an impetus for higher achievement in high school. At each of these sessions, a sign-in sheet is circulated to record participation and is kept on file. The agenda is kept with the corresponding attendance. Teachers are not paid for these sessions. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 67 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Other TOTAL 2018-19 RSCEP-R 68  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 32 School Name Academy of Urban Planning Borough Brooklyn School Number 552 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jorge Sandoval Coach . ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Carol Moore Teacher/Subject Area Jacqueline Helmig Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Patience Clemmons Superintendent Michael Alcoff Assistant Principal Valerie Vu Coach School Counselor Milena Uribe Parent Adalice Lopez Parent Coordinator Dale Donaldson Field Support Center Staff Member Michael Lee Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 193 2018-19 RSCEP-R 69 Total number of ELLs 42 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 21.76%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 3 4 1 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? ELA Regents exam, Gates MacGinitie assessment and NYSITELL. Data reveals ELLs struggle with essay writing performance tasks. Gates MacGinitie assessment reveals ELLs need free standing and an ELA with ESL support. NYSITELL also reveals ELLs need free standing and an ENL/ELA course. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We currently have ELA courses offered to ELLs with an ENL teacher. We now have ENL and ELA partnered in co-teaching because many of our ELLs need the ELA reinforcement and Common Core ELA exam preparation to succeed. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 70  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Gates MacGinitie provides teachers with a baseline and benchmark score to compare. Additionally, mock ELA regents exam provides teachers meaningful data to identify progress and areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Co-planning sessions among teachers provide regular opportunities to review data and make action plans. Grade team meetings allow for inquiry work using summative data. And instructional cabinet meetings combine subject areas to look at data on a macro scale. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: The Academy of Urban Planning is a 9-12 high school. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT and state Regents exams are used to evaluate our current students. NYSITELL is used to evaluate incoming students. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our guidance team works in conjunction with Ms. Moore, who is responsible for the intake process of ENL students. Together, they identify the language needs of students to develop a program that addresses students' needs. Ms. Moore also oversees the NYSESLAT testing of our current ENL students. When test results are available, she consults with our programmer to ensure students have the appropriate number of integrated and stand-alone ENL minutes on their programs. Additionally, these NYSESLAT scores are emailed to teaching staff so that teachers can scaffold lessons and group students appropriately. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 2 free standing sections for Entering and Emerging students are taught by ESL teachers. One section is for grades 9-10 and the second is for grades 11-12. In addition, ENL students take an ELA course taught by ENL and ELA teachers. These students also receive the support of an ENL teacher in content areas such as Science, Math or Social Studies. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Entering and Emerging students are programmed for a free-standing ENL course 5 days a week. This provides 1 unit of study per week of stand-alone instruction. All ENL students have co-taught subject-area courses, such as math, science, history, or 2018-19 RSCEP-R 71  ELA, Entering and Emerging students have 2 units of integrated ENL. Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding students receive 1 unit of integrated ENL. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Classes are usually divided into small groups with pivotal words translated in home language. They focus on CCLS traits with graphic organizers and joint strategies from co-teachers. Spanish translation is used through dictionaries, glossaries, and online translations. . All assignments are CCLS aligned through the use of Engage NY. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are evaluated by in-class assessments and interviews. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Provide SIFE students with social and emotional support through our partners and provide teachers with appropriate strategies. b. Provide all Newcomers with student mentors and teachers who monitor progress. c-e. Tutoring after school for Developing, Long Term, and former ELLs with ELA strategies. Continue to provide former ELLs with test-taking accommodations and after-school and Saturday school tutoring. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teacher inquiry teams will focus on ELL students and their progress with actionable feedback for next instructional steps to support ELL students across curricula and grades. SWDs will be using REWARDS to support language acquisition. This will help accelerate progress and support subgroups. ELLs with disabilities will benefit from ESL and ISS co-teaching. ISS department will alert all teachers of IEP meetings and include them in the process especially for ELLs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Extended Learning Time and Saturday School is provided for ELL-SWDs and ELL Students with periods 1-10 allowing ELLs to attend school later and receive additional tutoring. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs have Extended Learning Time with an ENL teacher. This provides additional learning time for these students with a pedagogue who can best meet their instructional needs and offer academic support. These classes have the benefit of being taught in English with the freedom to move into Spanish as needed. Because our ENL teachers co-teach in integrated ENL courses, they are well equipped to support our students with content-area coursework. ENL students are also urged to attend Saturday school, during which they can receive additional support from content-area teachers and ENL teachers. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will continue to unite our ELA and ENL teachers together through co-planning and co-teaching. We are perfecting our co-teaching pairs to optimize classroom results. To address the lag of ENL students passing the ELA Regents exam, we are exploring the use of the stand-alone ENL class to better support our ELLs with Regents-based tasks. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 72  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are always included in tutorial opportunities, cultural celebrations, and data inquiry work. ELLs play a huge part in our soccer and volleyball teams. Additional clubs such as Spanish Club and Student Council include our ELLs. Flyers advertising clubs and other activities are posted in Spanish to provide equal access. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Math, Science and Social Studies classes use translated and scaffolded materials. Beginners receive texts and other graphic novels. Intermediate ELLs use documents differentiated to their reading level. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Pivotal words are translated and assignments are differentiated. With co-teaching, an ENL teacher is available to monitor progress and gauge need. Through phone calls and in-person meetings, our teachers can assess home language support and provide or seek additional support as needed. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Interviewing all ELL-SWDs to establish instructional goals. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All schools on our campus share the resources of our Community School. We have partnered with Make the Road to provide our students with extra-curricular support. This Community Based Organization ensures that each school on campus receives funding and access to parent classes, mental health providers, medical providers, legal aid, and a myriad of other opportunities. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We enroll incoming ELLs in our Summer Bridge program. This spans the duration of summer school and provides students a chance to familiarize themselves with the school and our teachers before the start of the academic year. These students also have the opportunity to take the math and ELA Regents exam at the conclusion of the program. After school programs and Saturday Academy are also available to newly enrolled ELLs. The parent coordinator, ELL coordinator, and school counselor are all involved in the intake process. This includes interviewing student/family and providing mentors to help transition newly enrolled student. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish classes. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 73  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our teachers participate in inquiry cycles to develop and practice Writing Strategies. ENL teachers also participate in inter-visitation to observe other methods and strategies. The Parent Coordinator will attend training sessions on supporting ELL parents. Weekly PDs will include ELL support strategies (50%) for all staff. 3 x a week co-planning PD with a content teacher and ENL teacher. ENL teachers will attend UFT and District PDs about ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All teachers receive professional development per CR Part 154.2 in our weekly staff meetings. ELL-specific meetings are documented in meeting agendas. ENL teachers also attend out of school PD including NYSESLAT training and additional PDs offered through DELLS. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Counselors initiate meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss program goals and progress. These meetings are also attended by ENL teachers as appropriate to offer data showing growth and advancement. As a community school, translators are provide from other districts on our parent nights and assistance from our CBO as volunteers are present for translations. The parent coordinator has invested in translation devices that can be worn during meetings to provide parents real-time translation of meeting content. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Immigration workshops attract many ELL parents, but a very small number of ELL parents attend monthly Parent Associations and workshops held monthly. ENL teachers and counselors will continue to reach out to parents in order to bolster parent involvement. The Parent Coordinator will always address parents and will advocate for ESL parents and their concerns. In addition, our CBO partner will provide ESL parents with English classes after work in the school. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 74  2018-19 RSCEP-R 75 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Valerie Vu, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 76  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Academy of Urban Planning School DBN: 32K552 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jorge Sandoval Title Principal Valerie Vu Assistant Principal Dale Donaldson Parent Coordinator Carol Moore ENL/Bilingual Teacher Adalice Lopez Parent Jacqueline Helmig Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Milena Uribe School Counselor Michael Alcoff Michael Lee Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 // // // 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/28/18 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 RSCEP-R 77  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 32K552 School Name: Academy of Urban Planning Superintendent: Watts The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. ATS Student Emergency Contact Cards Letters to Parents Meetings with Parent Coordinator and School Aide 2018-19 RSCEP-R 78  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Spanish, Bengali and Arabic 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families September - Welcome Back, Notices for monthly Parent Association Meetings October - Notices for Parent Night, Notices for monthly Parent Association Meetings November - Notices for monthly Parent Association Meetings,Thanksgiving and Cultural Celebration Notice December - Notices for monthly Parent Association meetings, Closing Notice January - Notices for monthly Parent Assocation meetings, Report Cards, Welcome Back February - Notics for monthly Parent Association meetings, Closing Notice March - Notices for Parent Association Meetings, Parent UP event, NYSLAT Testing Notices 2018-19 RSCEP-R 79  April - Notices for Parent Assocation Meetings, Closings May - Notices for Parent Association Meetings, Testing-Afterschool PM, School Events, Regents June - Notices for Parent Association Meetings, June Regents, Common Core, Report Cards, Rights Letter for ENL/ESL services 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Welcome Back Event, Parent Night, Thanksgiving Cultural Night, Parent UP night, Monthly Student Awards, Monthly Parent Association, Targeting 50 families a week - in house meetings 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage 2018-19 RSCEP-R 80   Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All elevator entraces - student led marketing Postings in hallway and part of the intake process for new ENL parents and students List of personnel to contact at security desk Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? NYC School Survey In house survey 2018-19 RSCEP-R 81 
