 05M123 School Name: P.S. 123 MAHALIA JACKSON Principal: MELITINA HERNANDEZ 2018-19 RSCEP-R 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Mahalia Jackson School 05M123 310500010123 PreK - 8 School Number (DBN): 301 W. 140 Street, New York, NY 10030 212-342-6200 212-690-5925 Phone Number: M. Hernandez Fax: Mhernan5@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Geographical District: 05 Graham Windham Email Address: Melitina Hernandez Jeanine Lascelles Thelma Thompson Brittany Sparrow Gail Jeffries n/a District Information DanikaRux Superintendent: 123 Morningside Drive, Room 235, New York, NY 10027 Superintendent’s Office Address: drux@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-222-1395 Phone Number: 212-316-0451 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 3  05 FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Avenue, NY, NY 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-356-3853 Phone Number: 212-356-7546 Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with 2018-19 RSCEP-R 5  the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development 2018-19 RSCEP-R 6  The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure 2018-19 RSCEP-R 7  how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 8   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT x x x x X Name Position and Constituent Group Melitina Hernandez Thelma Thompson Brittany Sparrow Pamela Everett Joseph Sparrow Jeanine Lascelles Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 10 Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT x x x x x x Name Position and Constituent Group Naomi-Gaget-Williams Marissa Morales AlexandraCocchiarra Gail Jeffries Joseph Sparrow SchadellBarnhill Represented CBO Representative, if applicable/ Parent Parent Staff Staff Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor 2018-19 RSCEP-R 11  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. The PS/MS 123 School Community – PS/MS 123M is a Renewal school located in Harlem. Many of the students can be considered at risk. 21% of students are English Language Learners (ELLs); 24% of students are certified as Special Education; 28% of students live with other families or in temporary housing shelters located near the school. Although the school serves a high need population, the hard work of the administration, the teaching and support staff, and Renewal partner staff, has resulted in the school being removed from the Priority list and the Persistently Dangerous list. In 2017-18, the school met its Renewal Targets in English Language Arts and Collaborative Teachers, demonstrating an enhancement of the instructional program at the school. In 2017 - 18, the attendance rate at the school has risen on 91.3%, indicating a high level of student/family engagement. The school’s progress is the result of a laser focus on the whole child (each child’s academic achievement and growth, his/her social/emotional well-being, family engagement and support), effective use of resources, and intensive, job-embedded professional learning opportunities for staff and administrators. Using resources from a State Incentive Grant (SIG) and other budget sources , the school is fully outfitted with 21st Century technology - each classroom has electronic Smart Boards, iMacs, laptop computers, and iPads. Online learning resources (Discovery Ed, iReady, Imagine Learning, LightSails, Myon Reader, Accelerated Reader, Mathletics) are utilized across the grades, and are also available at home for students their families. The technology is utilized as an instructional tool to support English Language Learners and students with disabilities, lower and higher achievers, and engage parents as partners Beliefs About Student Learning - The school’s mission statement explicitly reflects its beliefs about student learning and states that “…we are committed to creating an educational environment, supported by the use of 21 st century technology….. so that children, parents, and staff from diverse ethnic, cultural, linguistic and economic backgrounds can work together with community partners to achieve a truly integrated, nurturing and academically rigorous school community that prepares students for post-secondary education and careers.” All staff recognize that students come to the school at various levels of academic and social emotional preparedness. Staff uses individualized and flexible groupings to enhance learning experiences to meet each students’ academic needs. But students cannot learn when outside concerns and needs impede their learning. Therefore, a comprehensive support network of service providers (social workers, guidance counselor, mental health workers, medical providers, Success Mentors) work collaboratively to address the social/emotional/physical health of students and their families. Efforts to create a safe and nurturing environment are ongoing so that the needs of the whole child are constantly the focus. Thus the school aims to create lifelong learners while helping our families manage daily living needs. Approach to Family Engagement – The school believes that parents are engaged when activities meet their needs. Graham Windham, the school’s Renewal Partner is the lead collaborating organization in organizing and 2018-19 RSCEP-R 12  implementing school-wide parent engagement activities. Additionally, parents are most responsive when they have and can understand information about the school, receive needed and appropriate support services, and are engaged at the classroom level. Therefore, a monthly parent newsletter is created on each grade informing parents about upcoming activities and learning experiences in their child’s classroom. Ongoing parent outreach is made by classroom and cluster teachers, and staff from Graham Windham in writing, via telephone through meetings, and via home visits. Discovery Education (which provides online learning resources in social studies and science). LightSails in the middle school and MyOn Reader in the elementary grades (provide over 13,000 leveled books for students and families to enjoy together ) enable students and their families to participate together in learning activities. A wide variety school-based services (guidance, social work, mental health wellness) and of partner organizations (e.g. League of Women Voters, Cuddleduds, Administration of Children's Services, New York Public Library, Graham Windham Children's Home Health Services) provide the support services parents need to be able to focus on their child's education. Community Partnerships Renewal Partner - Graham Windham, the school’s Renewal Partner, has truly become “part of the school” and provides student and family services in the area of student support, mental health, academic intervention, attendance improvement, and family engagement. The director serves on several school committees, and works closely with the principal and assistant principal to analyze school needs, develop plans for meeting these needs, implement instructional and social/emotional initiatives and further school goals. This renewal partnership has become a model of effectiveness and the principal and community school director have been asked to present features of this effective partnership to principals and renewal partners from across the city at the the NYC Community Schools Retreat. Other well-established partnerships with organizations that have a successful track record provide student support services, professional learning opportunities for school staff, student experiences in the visual and performing arts and chess. Partnership services are carefully crafted to further the school’s mission and focus, meet student needs, and managed so that services complement each other. Current partners include the following:  Partners for talent development, alternate means of expression and enhanced critical thinking challenges. They are: Studio in the School - Studio in a School provides experiences in the visual arts for lower grade students. National Dance Institute-NDI provides a dance program for students in the middle grades. Arts Matters provides a full time drama teacher for students in the middle grades. The program is funded through a grant. Expanded Day Program Partners provide expressive arts opportunities through a school club program. The partners are Society of the Educational Arts, Free Arts NYC, Harlem Magic Masters, Remo System Art of Stepping , Building Beats, Creative Arts Team Program, and Scholar STEM. .  Professional development partners: Partnerships with professional development organizations with strong track records of success in providing effective teacher training are established. A consultant technology coach provides one-on-one and small group support for teachers in the effective use of classroom technology to support learning and illuminate the curriculum, creating students’ project based learning activities through 2018-19 RSCEP-R 13 the use of technology. Literacy and math coaches provided small group, one-on-one support for teachers in literacy and mathematics, as well as whole school, customized teacher training workshops.  The school’s PENCIL partnership with Ogilvy provides students with a 16 week career mentoring program in which students engage in real-world work and career experiences. The program includes opportunities for college and career and workplace learning through on-site visits to the workplace, by engaging students in school-to-work conversations, and by working with students to develop presentation videos crafted around a strong social awareness, video advertising campaign. With their development of strong communication and teamwork skills, these students then return to the school as role models for their peers, and also share their learning about college and career opportunities.  Beacon Program - A long-time partnership with Graham Windham, through the Beacon Program, and now as the school’s Renewal Partner, has provided both after school instructional programs around developing leadership skills in our upper grade students, and providing social/emotional support for students and their families. Working with Graham Windham as our renewal partner has enabled the school to develop and expand services to students and families.  The YMCA provides extended day and after school programs for students in the lower grades.  Family Support Partnerships provide needed support to students and their families. The partners organizations include Smile Dental, League of Women Voters, Cuddleduds, Mayor's Office of Consumer Affairs, New York Public Library. Extended Day/Extended Week Programs ELT Program - As a renewal school, PS/MS 123M implements a mandated ELT program of 5 renewal hours per week for all students Pre-K - 8. The program, implemented in collaboration with partner agencies runs from Tuesday through Fridays, from 2:20 p.m. to 3:35 p.m. On Tuesdays – Thursdays, the program is focused on improving ELA and math achievement for all students. Special instructional materials and online resources are utilized that enable instruction to the differentiated to meet student needs. On Fridays, enrichment is the focus. Teachers design the enrichment program for his/her class based on each teacher’s interests and talents. A Friday Club Program for middle school students includes a STEP dance program, a student choir, arts program, a dance program, as well as a computer coding course. At the end of the year, an Enrichment Expo will be held to feature students’ work and accomplishments. Partner After School Programs – In collaboration with community partners (I.e. Graham Windham Beacon Program, and the YMCA, after school programs are implemented for students in grades K – 8. During the week, the programs wrapped around the ELT program and run until 6:00 p.m. In addition, partner organizations provided learning and recreational opportunities on Saturdays and during school vacations. Parents and family members are included in the Saturday programs as well. Saturday Academy In addition to the weekday ELT, in 2018-19 , the successful Saturday Academy will be implemented once again this year. The Saturday Academy serves students in grades 3 – 8. This invitational program was focused on improving student achievement in literacy and mathematics. Saturday ENL Program – Beginning in 2016-17 a Saturday ENL program was offered. The program will be continued in 2018-19. Students worked with their peers on oral language development, online learning in math and NYSESLAT preparation. The Chancellor’s Framework for Great schools has been an impetus for this RSCEP and sets clear expectations for next steps. As the school community continues its work, it is guided by a commitment to students’ learning, and engaging students in challenging, rigorous tasks, while meeting their social/emotional and academic needs on all levels. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 14  This 2018 - 19 RSCEP was created after extensive collaboration with teachers, parents and other school staff who serve on the School Leadership Team (SLT). Activities in each section have also been guided by recommendations received from members of the community at the 2018 Community School Forum. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 15  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 05M123 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 479 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 44 43 23 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 27 7 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 92.7% % Reduced Lunch 19.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.9% 40.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.5 2% 20% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 24.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 80% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Yes N/A 80 82 91.3% 2.3% 24.8% 51.4% 1.5% 2.3% 4 4% 8.9 15.3% 22% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups SWD, Black, Hispanic, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YSH N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-R 16  2018-19 RSCEP-R 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths - During this past year the school community has worked diligently to focus on implementing rigorous instruction across all grades and content areas. Teachers’ lessons and delivery of instruction show evidence of rigor and understanding how to design lessons that engage and differentiate.  Literacy Instruction - A literacy block, based on a balanced literacy approach and incorporating independent reading and guided reading, has been implemented. The school has established leveled classroom libraries across genres, made writing a priority, and has launched the Teachers’ College Writing Workshop across the school. In 2018-19 the Teachers College Writing Workshop will be implemented in all classrooms K – 2. In grades 3 - 8, Common Core Aligned Curriculum is utilized in all classrooms, supplemented by independent reading and guided reading.  Online Learning – Online learning resources are utilized across the grades in school and at home by students and their families. They are: ELA - MyOn Reading, Accelerated Reader, Imagine Learning (for ELLs), Lightsails, IReady. Math – IReady, Mathletics. Social Studies and Science – Discovery Education. To enable full use of the online learning resources, classrooms are equipped with Electronic Smart Boards, iMacs. laptops and iPads; laptop carts and iPad carts are shared among classrooms. An up-to-date computer lab, staffed by a full-time teacher serves students across the grades.  Data Driven Instruction - A focus on data driven instruction continues so that instruction is customized to meet individual student needs. Regularly scheduled data dives are conducted with the administration, in which teachers focus on individual student progress, grade level trends and whole school needs. Teachers collaboratively study and analyze individual student data, grade level data and school-wide trends. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 18   Formative Assessments guide data driven instruction across the grades - Math Benchmark Assessments, iReady Interim Assessments in ELA and Math, Fountas & Pinnell Reading Assessment, ELL Periodic Assessment, CMP and Go Math Assessments, and Expeditionary Learning. In 2018-19 the school will continue additional administration of the Fountas & Pinnell Assessment for at risk students who are below level in reading.  The school has become a pilot school for Data Wise framework for inquiry. The Principal and IEP Teacher have been trained by Harvard University in using Data Wise effectively. Teacher teams utilize Data Wise to develop skills to understand student learning, design learner centered problems, and conduct intervisitations to observe colleagues.  Curriculum Maps and Pacing Calendars have been created in all grades based on standards-based, common core aligned curricula – Expeditionary Learning in ELA; Go Math and CMP3 Math in mathematics. Curriculum maps are created by teachers and maintained in the Atlas Rubicon online platform Maps incorporate literacy across curriculum areas (science, social studies, math). Staff will continue to develop rigor in instruction through refinements to the curriculum maps/units, along with daily lesson plans that include inter-disciplinary teaching, engaging students through high level questions and discussions, rigorous instruction and monitoring students' daily progress and challenges.  Teacher teams - Well-functioning, grade level teacher teams work collaboratively to create yearlong curriculum maps and pacing calendars in literacy and mathematics, to align instruction across grades and across subject areas, and to ensure that the curriculum is comprehensively and thoroughly addressed. Team meetings are also opportunities for professional learning. During team meetings teachers utilize the Data Wise protocol to assess student progress.  The Expressive and Visual Arts are well established. The school supports a dance program, a vocal music program, an instrumental music program, and two art studios. In 2018 – 19, the arts program will include a drama program as well. The arts develop students talents, promote self-confidence and self-expression, augment spatial relationship and planning skills, and provide students with an alternate pathway for success.  Renewal Partnership - The school and Graham Windham, the renewal partner have developed a strong collaborative partnership in which Graham Windham staff have truly become part of the school community. The focus of the Graham Windham work has been in the are of student support services (by a full time social worker and on-site mental health wellness center), attendance improvement (Success Mentors "adopt" a family where students have chronic absenteeism and lateness), and family engagement (regularly scheduled family events bring family members into the school community). Graham Windham is also the school's Beacon partner which allows for seamless service in the area of family engagement and after school programs. The school leaders (principal and assistant principals) take an active role in observing and supporting teachers and providing customized support to teachers across the grades in all subject areas. Supporting Data - School Quality Guide was completed in 2016-17.  The school received a rating of "Good" in the areas of Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership and Trust, with scores around 3 out of 4 in all areas :Rigorous Instruction (2.95), Collaborative Teachers (3.01), Supportive Environment (2.69), Effective School Leadership (3.28), Strong Family-Community Ties (2.76), Trust (3.00).  On State Tests, the school received a rating of "Good" in closing the achievement gap in ELA for English Language Learners and Students with Special Needs. The school received a rating of Excellent in closing the achievement gap for the City's Lowest Performing Students in ELA, and a rating of "Good" for closing the achievement gap for the City's Lowest Performing Students in Mathematics.  Middle school students at the school have an 86% passing rate for their courses in math, English, social studies and science classes. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 19  A School Quality Review was conducted in January 2017 on which the school received a rating of Proficient, with specific ratings as included below. Data from the May 2018 QR will be included when available. Instructional Core 1.1– Rating – Proficient - Ensure engaging, rigorous and coherent curricula 1.2- Rating – Developing – Develop teacher pedagogy 2.2 – Rating Proficient - Align assessments to curricula School Culture 1.4 – Rating - Well Developed – Maintain a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes 3.4 – Rating – Proficient – Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations Systems for Improvement 1.3– Rating - Proficient – Make strategic organizational decisions to support instructional goals 3.1 – Rating - Proficient – Establish a coherent vision of school improvement 4.1 – Rating Proficient – Observe teachers using Danielson Framework 4.2 – Rating Proficient – Engage in professional collaborations on teams 5.1 – Rating – Proficient – Evaluate quality of school level decisions Priority Areas of Focus - Based on student data, recommendations from the Community Forum, ideas developed by the Instructional Cabinet, feedback from staff, students and parents. English Language Arts –  Focus on refining workshop model teaching and Teachers’ College Writing across the grades; Teachers' College Reading Program in K - 2. Focus on guided reading, student engagement, and vocabulary   Expand the use of online learning resources to enhance, differentiate and customize instruction (Accelerated Reader, MyOn Reader, Lightsails).  Regularly assess students, through the use of mid year IReady assessments, informal classroom assessments, and utilize data to refine and drive instructional practice. Math – Improve student achievement by enhancing teacher effectiveness. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 20   Refine and utilize grade specific yearlong pacing calendars and curriculum maps so school wide and grade level  teachers are kept focused on effectively implementing the entire math curriculum and scaffolding skills. Launch Algebra for All, a framework for math that embeds algebraic concepts into the CMP3 Math, Engage Math, and Go Math curriculum to lay the foundations for understanding algebraic concepts in upper grades. Middle School teachers will attend a 8 week Summer Academy to learn to use the program effectively.  Provide teacher coaching support through an expanded partnership with Manhattan Field Support Center and Teaching Matters to provide in-school coaching for teachers across the grades to improve math pedagogy.  Utilize online learning tools to customize and differentiate instruction (iReady Math, Mathletics)  Regularly assess students utilizing the Go Math and CMP3 Math assessments, and iReady Math assessments Social Studies and Science – Provide active learning through project based and hands-on lessons within units developed around essential questions. Infuse social studies and science content into literacy by aligning Expeditionary Learning units with social studies and science curriculum. Include alignment in grade level curriculum maps and pacing calendars. Utilize Discovery Education in science and math to provide real-time research opportunities and to connect classroom activities to the real world. Launch the Amplified Science Program for students in grades K - 5. The program provides hands-on learning opportunities. The Passport to Learning social studies program will be launched in grades K - 5. The program outlines project based learning experiences for elementary students. Connect the Arts to the Curriculum – Develop processes whereby arts, music, and dance instruction is infused into instructional units through theme based projects. Technology – Maximize the use of existing hardware (computer carts, iPads, laptops, iMacs and Electronic Smart Boards) and online learning tools (Accelerated Reader, iReady Literacy and Math, MyOn Reader, Lightsails, Mathletics,) by providing teacher training in engaging students through multiple approaches. Directly link work in the computer laboratory with classroom instruction and units of study. Academic Intervention Services (AIS)- Support struggling students through customized AIS services provided by teachers on professional periods through small group intervention. Fundations, iReady, Reading Rescu and Reading Partners programs will be utilized. Standardized Grading System - launch an effective online grading system to be utilized in the middle school Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? At the end of the Renewal period, we expect to build a school where students are engaged, where teachers are collaborating to effectively utilize data to deliver a rigorous instructional program, where students receive the social/emotional/academic supports they need, where students and teachers work together in a safe and secure environment, and where family and community are active partners in the education of all students. The instructional vision focuses on the following:  Utilizing data to drive instruction - ongoing assessment of student progress via interim benchmark assessments and examining student work regularly to adjust instruction to meet the various needs of students. Needs of diverse learners (i.e. ELLs, SWD) are addressed. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 21  Effective use of fiction and non-fiction writing using the workshop model. Incorporating content-based writing into the literacy program. Student writing shows improvement in both volume and clarity and students have expertise in using rubrics to meet expectations of assignments. Students become adept at citing text-based evidence to support their opinions both in their writing and student discussions. Instructional shifts are incorporated into teacher practice.   Teachers use manipulatives, technology, graphic organizers, online learning resources, and leveled materials to engage all learners. Classroom environments evidence strong links to the curricula, displaying student work, anchor charts, and include leveled and genre-based fiction and non-fiction classroom libraries. What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? Teachers utilize the Teachers' College Reading and Writing program in grades K - 2 (Writing Program is implemented across the grades). These workshop model programs differentiate instruction and build upon students success. The programs build a love of reading and writing among students as they learn to express themselves orally and in writing, and learn from literary examples. Teachers adjust the Expeditionary Learning (3 – 8) modules/units/lessons to incorporate strategies for small groups, English language learners, students with disabilities, students who live in shelters, and struggling students (who may be homeless and highly mobile). Expeditionary Learning is a CCLS aligned curricula that build cultural awareness. Teacher teams align assessments, and identify resources to support teaching and learning to address cultural differences in students and diverse learners.. For middle and upper grades the Expeditionary Learning (EL) curriculum is adjusted to show a clear link to the reading and writing standards with defined learning targets, assessment and differentiation practices. Work continues to be expanded to embed cross-content scope and sequence across all grades when possible. Teachers implement the workshop model to engage students in their learning following an “I do, We do, You do” strategy, thus providing clear expectations for students. The math curriculum, Go Math for lower grades and CMP3 for upper grades, is reviewed and adjusted to meet the needs of students. Utilizing EngageNY as a resource, teachers refine the yearlong curriculum that is aligned to the NYS Scope and Sequence, and incorporate lessons and tasks from Go Math and CMP3 and Engage NY to prepare students to be proficient across the math instructional shifts in all areas including accuracy, fluency, and practice. What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? Program offerings are varied and differentiated according to student need (i.e. utilize a variety of learning tools including technology), are aligned with the common core curriculum, and engage students. In ELA, students utilize fiction and non-fiction, content-rich texts to build knowledge and academic vocabulary. Writing and discussions are based on evidence from common texts. Students are taught to state their claims and defend their positions with evidence from the text. In math, instruction builds fluency, deep understanding and application, and is linked across the grades. Students focus deeply on concepts so they build strong conceptual knowledge and understanding, and are able to transfer math skills across concepts and subject areas. Literacy is incorporated across subject areas, and students engage in project based learning that utilizes fiction and non-fiction texts. To build college readiness, the school implements cross-curricular STEAM activities (Science/Technology/Engineering/Arts/Math) across the grades as well as offering opportunities for experiences in the world of work through community and corporate partnerships. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 22  What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? Students are engaged and take some responsibility for their own learning. Teachers set high expectations with the knowledge of students to scaffold questions, chunk text and engage students in student discussions. The Danielson framework is the basis of the delivery of the instructional program. Instruction is purposeful. Students know what to do and are clear about what they have been learning. They set goals and monitor progress towards meeting those goals. Parents are included in the goal setting and steps towards achieving goals. Teaching is differentiated to meet the needs of diverse learners and cultural differences. Clear directions for classroom activities are presented; presentations are made with accuracy and clarity, linking concepts to students’ prior knowledge. Concepts are scaffolded, and connected to students’ interests and their lives beyond the classroom. How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? Teachers meet students where they are in the learning process and move them along at a pace that is consistent with their ability. Teacher support, task complexity and pacing are varied so all students can be successful. Through a variety of pre-planned DOK questioning and discussion opportunities, students can apply the content and concepts. Teachers have the opportunity to participate in professional learning according to their own learning profile and take time to assess student progress and needs. A school-wide focus on questioning allows for multiple entry points throughout the lesson. Small group instruction is the strategy that drives instruction. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? Performance based assessments as well as school developed writing and math benchmarks across the content areas are administered regularly. Data relative to student performance and progress is aggregated and disaggregated looking at students performing at low- middle- and high levels so that teachers can adjust daily lessons to meet the needs of all of their students. The school continues using online assessments, serving as supplemental online reading and student assessment programs, promoting students reading independently on well-matched texts. Teacher teams have defined time during professional development and on common preps to meet and use the data results to inform curriculum planning and daily instruction. An assessment calendar created in collaboration with the Instructional Cabinet has a balance of formative and summative benchmark assessments with built in data conferences and 6-8 week interventions plan. The benchmarking assessments are administered multiple times per year to track student progress. Benchmark assessments are chosen as a comprehensive, diagnostic approach for the purpose of planning small group and direct skill-based intervention. Established common rubrics are designed to provide teacher teams a common focus across assignments. Online learning tools are also used for benchmarking and formative assessment. Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) Fountas & Pinnell Formative, diagnostic Pen and Pencil Ready Assessments Go Math/CMP 3 Math Assessments Formative, diagnostic K - 8 K - 8 Formative/ Benchmark 3 - 5 times per year Formative/Benchmark 3 times per year Diagnostic/formative K - 8 Formative assessment 3 times per year Math Benchmarks Benchmark K - 8 Formative/Benchmark 3 times per year 2018-19 RSCEP-R 23 Benchmark/Diagnostic K - 8 Formative assessment 3 times per year Diagnostic/formative K - 8 Formative assessment 3 times per year iReady Benchmarks in Literacy and Math Expeditionary Learning/Ready Gen Assessments Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, implementation of a rigorous curriculum will result in increased student achievement in ELA as measured by achieving an Average Proficiency Rating of 2.41. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Average Math Proficiency Average ELA Proficiency Performance Index on State Exam 2018-19 RSCEP-R 24  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) LITERACY COMMON CORE ALIGNED PROGRAMS - Teachers' College Writing workshop model across the grades; Reading workshop model in grades K - 2 Average ELA proficiency Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, consultant coaches iReady ELA Mid Year Assessment All students, K-2 including ELLs, SWD, high achieving - AIS services provided by classroom teachers to small groups of students according to needs Struggling students Average ELA proficiency - Reading Rescue, Reading Partners, Fundations literacy development programs - Instructional Arts programs (vocal music, instrumental music, drama, dance) support literacy, science and social studies instruction. - Classroom technology and online resources augment student learning, differentiate and instruction: MyOn Reader, Lightsails, Accelerated Reader, Imagine Learning (ENL students) MATHEMATICS COMMON CORE ALIGNED PROGRAMS : - Go Math (K – 5) and CMP3 Math (6 – 8) will continue to be utilized by classroom teachers. Primary grade students All students K - 8 Average ELA Proficiency Average ELA Proficiency All students K - 8 Average ELA Proficiency September 2018 - June 2019 October 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Classroom teachers Classroom teachers, reading volunteers Special teachers, partner organizations Classroom teachers, technology coach iReady ELA Mid Year Assessment iReady Mid Year Assessment iReady Mid Year ELA Assessment iReady Mid Year ELA Assessment All students, including ELLS, SWD, struggling students and high achievers Average Math Proficiency September 2018 - June 2019 Classsroom teachers, assistant principals iReady Mid Year Math Assessment, Ready Pen and Pencil Mid Year Assessment 2018-19 RSCEP-R 25 Students grades 5 - 8 Average Math Proficiency September 2018 - June 2019 Classroom teachers, assistant principals iReady Math Mid year assessment The Algebra for All framework for math will be launched. The program embeds CMP3 Math, and Go Math and makes students aware of algebraic concepts, and lays the foundation with grounding concepts. Teachers will attend an 8 week summer training program. - The Atlas Rubicon online learning platform utilized to standardize the format of curriculum maps; enable teachers to share between and across grades and subject area; maps are aligned to current student data - Ongoing math assessment will occur during Grade Level Team Meetings and during common prep periods. Teachers will use Data Wise to analyze the results and develop strategies for addressing individual student needs - Classroom technology resources (iMacs, iPads, laptops) and online technology resources (e.g. Mathletics, iReady) will augment classroom lessons and provide additional practice to achieve math fluency SCIENCE AND SOCIAL STUDIES Amplified Science - a hands on science program will be instituted All students grade K - 8 Average Math Proficiency September 2018 - June 2019 Classroom teachers, consultant coaches, assistant principals All students, including ELLs, SWDs, struggling students, and higher achievers. All students, including ELLs, SWDs, struggling students, and higher achievers. Average Math Proficiency September 2018 - June 2019 Classroom teachers, subject area teachers, assistant principals Average Math Proficiency September 2018 - June 2019 Classroom teachers, subject area teachers, assistant principals Students grades K - 5 Average ELA and Math proficiency September 2018 - June 2019 Classroom teachers, subject area teachers, assistant principals iReady Mid Year Math Assessment, Ready Pen and Pencil Mid Year Assessment iReady Mid Year Math Assessment, Ready Pen and Pencil Mid Year Assessment iReady Mid Year Math Assessment, Ready Pen and Pencil Mid Year Assessment iReady Mid Year Math Assessment, Ready Pen and Pencil Mid Year Assessment iReady Mid Year Math Assessment, Ready Pen and Pencil Passport Learning - a project based social studies program will be implemented and supported by Discovery online learning Students grades K - 5 Average ELA proficiency September 2018 - June 2019 Classroom teachers, subject area teachers, assistant principals 2018-19 RSCEP-R 26  PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT/PROFESSIONAL LEARNING TO IMPROVE INSTRUCTIONAL RIGOR - A Teacher Resource Center staffed by consultant literacy and math coaches, and the school math coach/ data specialist teacher, who will be available to assist teachers in designing lessons and unit plans. The center will be stocked with resource and professional materials, computers and testing information. Consultant ELA coach (2 times per week) and math consultant coach (2 times per week) will work with teacher teams in the center as well as in their classrooms to refine assignments, create curriculum maps (using Atlas Rubicon) and develop effective pedagogy. - Math professional development will be provided by consultant math coach, Manhattan Field Support Center, Math Solutions, and Teaching Matters to develop model classrooms to be used for intervisitations. - Professional learning in refining use of Data Wise to utilize processes and habits of mind to use data to drive decision making - Technology staff development by a consultant technology coach ( 2 times per week)for enhancing and augmenting the use of online learning resources, smart boards, computers and laptops Teacher Inquiry Groups will be implemented in six week cycles, during Monday afternoon professional learning time. Teachers will collaboratively study a topic of interest and present findings to peers. EXTENDED DAY/ WEEK PROGRAMS Mid Year Assessment All teachers K - 8 Average Math and ELA proficiency September 2018 - June 2019 Consultant coaches, school math coach/data specialist iReady Mid Year Assessment Classroom teachers, subject area teachers All teachers K - 8 All teachers PreK - 8 Average Math proficiency October 2018 - May 2019 Consultant coaches iReady Math Mid Year Assessment Average Math and ELA proficiency Average Math and ELA proficiency October 2018 - May 2019 August 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principals Technology coach iReady ELA and Math Mid Year Assessments iReady ELA and Math usage reports All teaches PreK - 8 Average Math and ELA proficiency October 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, assistant principals, coaches, principal Inquiry Group presentations 2018-19 RSCEP-R 27  - Expanded Learning Time ( ELT) program is aligned to school-day literacy and math instruction. The program provides additional support through a combination of funding sources and utilizes various learning modalities, including online learning. ELT Club Program - A club program is provided during Friday ELT time according to student interest and teacher skills and talents. The program will be collaboratively designed by teachers and students Extended Day/Extended Week/ Extended Year Programs - Community Based Organization (CBO) wrap-around programs extend the ELT to 6 p.m. on weekdays, and also provide programs on Saturdays and on school vacations for students and families Saturday Academy and Saturday ENL Programs serve struggling upper grade students and ELL students 4b – Parent and Family Engagement All students, including ELLs, SWD, struggling students, high achieving students Middle School Students Average Math and ELA proficiency September 2018 - June 2019 Classroom teachers, partner staff, Community Schools Director Average Math and ELA proficiency October 2018 - June 2019 Partner staff, classroom teachers, Community Schools Director Students K - 8 Average Math and ELA proficiency Partner staff September 2018 - June 2019 Average Math and ELA proficiency December 2018 - May 2019 Assistant principal, classroom teachers ENL students, low achieving students grades 3 - 8 iReady Mid Year Assessments in ELA and Math iReady Mid Year Assessments in ELA and Math iReady Mid Year Assessments in ELA and Math iReady Mid Year Assessments in ELA and Math How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Newsletters - Monthly Grade Level Parent Newsletters, created by teachers on a grade, will be distributed to provide parents with the information they need to understand what their child is learning and be prepared for upcoming events. In addition, the principal and Renewal Partner will send parent newsletters periodically on a variety of topics as need arises. Tuesday Afternoon Parent Outreach - Tuesday afternoons are reserved for parent outreach. During that time parents are able to speak with teachers via telephone or by making an appointment to meet with the teacher at the school. During that time parents can ask questions about individual concerns and get information pertaining to his/her child. Pastries With The Principal sessions are held monthly. At that time important information is disseminated regarding instruction and curriculum as well as other topics. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 28  Sip and Learn Sessions - Monthly parent workshops are held on a variety of topics. The sessions are organized by the school's Renewal Partner. Teacher-led Parent Workshops: Next Generation Standards, Early Literacy and Math games, Math centers and trainings that show parents how to access our online platforms. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. The following resources will be leveraged to meet this goal:  The Teacher Resource Center will be staffed by a data/math coach, consultant literacy and math coaches and a consultant technology coach. The center will be stocked computers and a wealth of commercial and teacher-made resource materials. The Center staff will be available on site daily to assist teachers with lesson and unit planning, teaching strategies, curriculum maps, and student support strategies.  Consultant coaches in literacy, mathematics, and data analysis, will work with teachers to help them develop effective teaching strategies based on student data in small groups and one-on-one.  Weekly Teacher Team Meetings that are focused on teaching and learning will be a venue for building a community of learners focused on providing an instructional program that is diversified to meet the needs of our student population.  ELT services provided during the mandated renewal hour provided by PS/MS 123M teachers, Graham Windham staff and other partner staff (i.e.. YMCA, Club Program Partners)  Per Session funds will be utilized for the ELT program and a Saturday Academy program. The Saturday Academy will be supervised by school administrators working per session. Per session funding will also be utilized for teachers who work after school to create curriculum materials and provide workshops for colleagues.  Per diem funds will be utilized to relieve teachers to attend professional development opportunities. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, implementation of a rigorous curriculum will result in increased student achievement in ELA as measured by 30% of students achieving their iReady Growth Target. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. iReady assessments administered in fall and winter. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? PS/MS 123, The Mahalia Jackson School is focused on meeting the social/emotional needs of all students so that students are well behaved and come to school regularly. To grow a supportive environment that best serves the diverse student population, the school community recognizes the importance of creating an environment where students feel safe and are engaged in school. School Strengths -  Core Values -As an outgrowth of a positive behavior centered system, the school has developed a set of Core Values to provide clarity regarding student behaviors. These Rock-It Core Values are Respect for All; Own it!!; Care for Your Community - Come Ready to Learn; Keep it Safe. Core values are used to establish a Code of Collaboration and Shared Vision in every class to which students connect, and remind their classmates to uphold. The core values are also the basis of the school's Rock-it-Bucks initiative which rewards positive behaviors, good attendance and no lateness.  Code of Collaboration – At the beginning of the school year, each class developed a Code of Collaboration and Shared Vision. This is a collaborative process with students and teachers. Hanging proudly in each classroom, these serve to remind students of how their own voice was key in developing norms for behavior. During the year, students remind each other of the Code of Conduct they agreed upon. The Codes of Collaboration again speak to the school’s core values.  Professional Development for Teachers - Consultant support for classroom teachers to develop enhanced classroom management skills and practices is ongoing. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 30   A Student Support Group (SSG), led by the school’s full-time guidance counselor, meets regularly with student support staff to discuss individual students as well as to develop school-wide plans and initiatives for improving school safety and student discipline. The team includes staff from Graham Windham (i.e. family coach, program director, social worker, mental health workers), the school Renewal Partner.  High Standards of Behavior - The school has sets high standards for student behavior and students know that   there are consequences should they not follow school rules. Shared Responsibility for Student Behavior - Every member of the school community has taken on the responsibility to student behavior. Teachers and administrators position themselves in strategic places during AM arrival, PM dismissal, and for all transitions during the school day. Student Support Center - The school has set aside one classroom that serves as a Student Support Center, for students who need some time out to collect themselves and be reminded of expectations around behavior in our school. The Center is staffed by a full-time teacher. During the time spent in the Student Support Center, students receive academic intervention instructional services and student support counseling in a positive setting. They have time to reflect, in writing, about their choices and how they can improve their decision making for future problem solving/conflict situations.  Attendance Outreach Program – In collaboration with Renewal Partner staff (e.g. Family Coach, Social Worker, Success Mentors, Director) a formalized attendance outreach program has been developed, that includes a Rock-It-Bucks attendance incentive component, parent outreach and a home visits component. Students who exhibit chronic absenteeism are paired with a Success Mentor, who meets individually with the student to discuss how the student is doing that day. On days when the student is absent, a phone call is made by the Success Mentor to the home. The Success Mentor also conducts home visits to visit with the family and discuss attendance challenges. The school’s Attendance Committee meets regularly to monitor school-wide and grade attendance, and individual student attendance. The outreach program focuses both on rewarding good attendance and punctuality, and providing intense outreach for students and families with poor attendance and lateness patterns. Attendance incentives/rewards are provided throughout the school year with special emphasis and activities during periods of potential high absenteeism. Social Services Student and Family Support – The school developed a comprehensive social services component into the design of the Renewal partnership. An on-site, full-time mental health Wellness Center operates full-time and is staffed by a full-time social worker and mental health workers who provide intensive counseling and case management for students and their families. Additional family support services are provided through partnerships with local government agencies and other organizations: an HRA Benefits Liaison, free health insurance from Affinity Health Plan, family support services from Administration for Children's Services, voter registration assistance from the Women's Voting League, housing outreach and consumer rights counseling from the Mayor's Office of Consumer Affairs, peer mentoring and workshops from the NYS Office of Children and Family Services, free picture identification cards from Mayor's Office of Operations, literacy programs from the NY Public Library.   Health Services - A school nurse is at the school daily. Doctors and dentists visit the school periodically to provide health screening and treatment when indicated. As full-time Asthma Specialist serves students with asthma issues.  Comprehensive Visual and Performing Arts Program – An extensive visual and performing arts program includes two visual arts studios, a vocal music classroom, an instrumental music program, a drama program, and a dance program. The arts have served as a vehicle to not only develop academic strengths (e.g. spatial relationships, speaking and listening, critical thinking), but also to build collaboration and cooperation between and among students. In addition, the arts provide an alternate venue for students to be successful, building student motivation and engagement in school. Students find talents they otherwise did not know they had and feel empowered and positive, translating this feelings into positive student interaction and school engagement. Social Emotional Response Practice – Teachers in grades K -2 have been trained in Social Emotional Response practice, a program that focuses on developmental milestones to be socially and emotionally responsible. A Teddy Bear study is underway.   Restorative Circles – In the middle school, teachers and guidance counselors were trained to lead and facilitate Restorative Circles. Restorative Circles help students build community, problem solve, and find common ground. Students who needed needing to bond and learn coping skills were identified. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 31   Crisis Team – The Crisis Team provides quick response when a crisis occurs. Response to breaking a rule could include de-escalation, intervention by the guidance counselor, reflection, action plan/re-entry plan, bringing in parents, involving Graham Windham staff in counseling/support, or referrals to outside agencies.  Teacher Dean - A full-time teacher/dean works closely with students who exhibit inappropriate school behaviors to help them manage their behaviors and become successful in school. Available data - The 2016 - 17 School Survey - Supportive Environment - reported the following:  100% of teachers agreed that there is an expectation that teachers communicate regularly with parents  93% of parents agreed that the school makes them aware of any emotional or psychological issues affecting their child's academic performance  96% of parents agreed that at their school their child is safe  93% of parents reported that they are very satisfied with the response they get when they contact their school  92% of parents agreed that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs  90% of parents agreed that they feel well informed by the communications they receive from the school Although the results of the 2017-18 School Survey are not yet available, the school has achieved 100% parent responses on the survey - up from 69% in 2016-17 and 39% in 2016-16. Quality Review - January 2017- The document will be updated when the data from the May 2018 Quality Review will be included when available. For Quality Indicator 1.4 - Positive Learning Environment - the school received a rating of Well Developed. Findings indicated that "there are structures in place, such that the school community has established a positive, nurturing, and integrated approach to school culture, discipline and social-emotional support. " The impact resulted in a "safe, welcoming environment and inclusive culture promote progress toward school goals and meaningfully involve student voice in decision making. Each student is well known by adults who guide and influence his or her academic and personal behaviors." Priority Areas of Focus/School Needs – Although a great deal of progress has been made in the area of Supportive Environment, the school will be addressing the following needs;  Refine processes for following up with students and families with attendance and lateness issues  Enhance process for engaging families in student learning that includes input from all support personnel  Enhance supervisory procedures for lunchroom and other higher incident areas of the school  Work with school security to carefully monitor parent visitors to the building  Coordinate and monitor services provided by renewal partner staff (mental health staff, family coach, social worker) Improve attendance rates, especially for middle school students and those who live in shelters.  Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 32  At the end of the Renewal period we envision the following:  High attendance rate (benchmark 91.4 %) as a result of carefully monitored attendance procedures, additional follow-up with families by school support personnel and teachers, and additional support services for families in need through the school's renewal partnership. For 2017-18, the YTD attendance rate has exceeded the attendance benchmark. Lower our overall rates of incidents as evidenced by our OORS entries   A student behavior program that formalizes processes for celebrating and promoting positive student behaviors.  Students are included in school decision making through a regularly scheduled student council and student voice on the attendance committee.  Well-functioning Student Support Group and Attendance Committee made up of school and partner support personnel that coordinate efforts and services for students and families, building more positive student behavior and parent engagement.  A procedure for regularly assessing student behavior data between teachers, support personnel and partner staff so that all stakeholders have an understanding of student needs and effective strategies to address those needs.  A well-functioning mental health Wellness Center that coordinates efforts with school and partner support personnel to provide a well-rounded approach to meeting family needs  Effective procedures for both welcoming and monitoring visitors to the building  Families are included in the design of services from support personnel. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner Graham Windham CBO Focus Graham Windham (GW) is both the school Beacon and Renewal partner. The organization provides support to the ELT Renewal hour program, and extended day/extended week programs. GW staff sit on school committees (Community Engagement Team, Student Support Group, Attendance Committee) to plan and implement initiatives and integrate and align services. The on-site mental health wellness center, full-time social worker, Success Mentors and full time family coach are also a result of the partnership with GW. Graham Windham also provides clinical health services in the home through their Children's Home Health Program. YMCA Provides extended day services during ELT and a wrap around after school program for students in grades K - 2 Studio in a School (SIAS) Provides art experiences for talent development and alternative avenue for expression for students in elementary school four days per week National Dance Institute (NDI) Provides a dance program for students in the middle grades that recognizes students talents and builds self esteem Provide an ELT Enrichment Club program to engage middle school students while developing talents and interests. Dance Theater of Harlem, Remo Systems, Scholar Stem, Songs of Solomon, Society of Educational Arts Bank Street College Provides training and guidance for an Emotionally Responsive Practice program Reading Rescue Provides training for staff to implement a Reading Rescue program for students in grades K - 2 to keep them engaged in school 2018-19 RSCEP-R 33 Creative School Services Urban Advantage Provides professional development for teachers and educational programs for students in science that are designed to engage and motivate students Provides professional development for teachers and educational programs for students in science that are designed to engage and motivate students Chess in the Schools Provides a chess program for students in collaboration with school staff. The program encourages collaboration and cooperation while building critical thinking skills. Literacy Support Systems Provides on-site coaches in technology, literacy development, program design and management. Teaching Matters, Inc. Provides on-site coaches for improving mathematics instructional practice. Homebase Cuddleduds Smile Dental Penguin/Random House Provides family assistance with housing support and services Provides warm weather clothing for needy students Free dental services in the school Literacy activities and free books for students grades 1 - 3 How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? Careful planning with partner organizations is ongoing at weekly Think Tank meetings and includes opportunities for family participation and family events (Family Saturday, student performances, family workshops, family exhibitions, grandparents day, family breakfast). Extensive family outreach is conducted by Graham Windham (GW), the school Renewal Partner with ongoing contact and home visits for parents of students who are experiencing difficulties. The GW family coach, and social worker coordinate efforts to engage parents during the school year, and are also available on a daily basis for informal parent engagement in the main office. The on-site mental health wellness center brings parents into the school for needed services. Additional health services (i.e. dental clinic) are also provided at the school. A Success Mentoring program provides students with mentors who check in with identified students with chronic absenteeism. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, school wide structures and systems for student support will result in a reduction of 20% compared to the previous year in the number of students who exhibit inappropriate behaviors as measured by reported Level 4 and Level 5 incidents on the OORS online reporting system. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve: Through carefully designed and monitored practice, the following Renewal Leading Indicators are expected to improve: Student Attendance 2018-19 RSCEP-R 34 Strong Family/Community Ties Collaborative Teachers 2018-19 RSCEP-R 35  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) SOCIAL/EMOTIONAL SUPPORT Social services, counseling, family support provided by the on-site mental health Wellness Center, family coach, family worker, social worker will continue. Services are provided for students and families. - The successful comprehensive expressive arts program (dance, visual arts, vocal music, ) will be expanded to include instrumental music and will continue to build upon students talents, and provide students with an alternate means of expression, while also building academic strengths. - A Social Emotional Response program that focuses on developmental milestones to be socially and emotionally responsible will continue - Restorative Circles, implemented by newly trained teachers and guidance counselors will be expanded Students and families who are in need of additional support Student Attendance, Strong Family/ Community Ties September 2018 - June 2019 Social Worker, Wellness Workers, partner staff, Principal Attendance Data, OORS Data, Student Support Room Data September 2018 - June 2019 Arts subject area teachers, consultant teachers Attendance Data, OORS Data All students PreK - 8 Student Attendance, Strong Family/ Community Ties, Collaborative Teachers Students K - 2 Student Attendance, Strong Family/ Community Ties, Collaborative Teachers Classroom teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Attendance Data, OORS Data Students grades 6 - 8 Student Attendance, Strong Family/ Community Ties September 2018 - June 2019 Middle school teachers Attendance Data, OORS Data 2018-19 RSCEP-R 36 All students Student Attendance, Strong Family/ Community Ties September 2018 - June 2019 Guidance Counselor, GW staff Attendance Data, OORS Data Middle School Students Student Attendance, Strong Family/ Community Ties October 2018, and ongoing GW Staff, Principal Attendance Data, OORS Data All Students Student Attendance, Strong Family/ Community Ties September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, GW staff, partner staff At-risk students Student Attendance, Strong Family/ Community Ties September 2018 - June 2019 Support Room Graham Windham Mental health social worker and intern All students Student Attendance, Strong Family/ Community Ties September 2018 - June 2019 GW Staff, assistant principals, principal Student Support Room data, Crisis Intervention Team data, OORS Reports, Attendance Data Student Support Room data, Crisis Intervention Team data, OORS Reports, Attendance Data Student Support Room data, Crisis Intervention Team data, OORS Reports, Attendance Data - A Crisis Team (made up of Guidance Counselor and GW partner staff) will continue to provide quick response when needed. - Student Retreats- Students engage in team building and self-esteem activities to promote positive school/peer relationships IN SCHOOL BEHAVIOR SUPPORT STRUCTURES AND SYSTEMS - Supportive Environment Committees (Student Support Group, Attendance Committee, Crisis Team, Task Force) will continue to meet regularly to design and implement initiatives that support positive student behaviors. - Our Graham Windham wellness program established in 2015 will continue in 2018-19. The room services students who need to cool down, reflect and re-engage, receive counseling and where they are provided with mentoring and referrals to personnel for academic instruction. - The successful Rock-It Bucks Behavior Support System will be continued. The program will include collaboratively designed student and parent incentives for positive student behaviors (e.g. attendance, arriving on time for school, being engaged in work, positive classroom and school behaviors) including celebrations, awards. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 37  Incentives will be designed by teachers, members of student support committees (e.g. Attendance Committee, Student Support Committee), Substance Abuse Prevention Intervention Specialist (SAPIS), Graham Windham staff, students. Success Mentors Attendance Outreach Program – spearheaded by our renewal partner, telephone contacts, Daily calling program, classroom visits and home visits are made to students with poor attendance and high lateness. - Code of Collaboration – A code of collaboration is collaboratively developed by students and teachers in each class. The code specifies the conduct that each class has agree upon. Crisis Intervention Team - Events Protocols- When student incidents occur, the situation will be handled by the Crisis Intervention Team using an established protocol for addressing student issues. Students who exhibit poor attendance patterns Student Attendance, Strong Family/ Community Ties GW staff September 2018 - June 2019 All students PreK - 8 Student Attendance, Strong Family/ Community Ties September 2018 - June 2019 Classroom teachers Students with disciplinary issues Student Attendance, Strong Family/ Community Ties September 2018 - June 2019 Guidance Counselor, GW staff Full-time Teacher Dean will provide support and monitoring for students who are at risk of disruptive behaviors Students who require additional support and monitoring Student Attendance, Strong Family/ Community Ties September 2018 - June 2019 Dean, assistant principals, principal Student Support Room data, Crisis Intervention Team data, OORS Reports, Attendance Data Student Support Room data, Crisis Intervention Team data, OORS Reports, Attendance Data Student Support Room data, Crisis Intervention Team data, OORS Reports, Attendance Data Student Support Room data, Crisis Intervention Team data, OORS Reports, Attendance Data 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 38  Tuesday Afternoon Parent Outreach - Tuesday afternoons are reserved for parent outreach. During that time parents are able to speak with teachers via telephone or by making an appointment to meet with the teacher at the school. During that time parents can ask questions about individual concerns and get information pertaining to his/her child. Pastries With The Principal sessions are held monthly. At that time important information is disseminated regarding instruction and curriculum as well as other topics. Parents get to know the principal on a personal level resulting in greater parent engagement. Sip and Learn Sessions - Monthly parent workshops are held on a variety of topics. The sessions are organized by the school's Renewal Partner. Topics include Handling Stress, Helping Your Child With Homework, Understanding Your Child's IEP. Success Mentors and Family Coach - Renewal staff conduct home visits, meet with parents at the school and speak via telephone daily. The family coach works with all parents in the school, especially parents of newly admitted students. The Success Mentors interact primarily with students and parents of students who are having difficulty in school and with attendance. Teacher Dean - A full-time teacher-dean works with students and parents of students who are having difficulties in school to help them develop positive behaviors, provide support at home, and become engaged with the school. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The following resources will provide leverage to achieve annual goals:  A schedule that includes weekly grade level team meetings and common prep periods at which teachers are able to discuss students who are having difficulties and collaboratively design appropriate interventions  Renewal Partner collaboration to support school initiatives (program director, family coach, social worker, AIS   providers, after school activities, inter-generational events) Student Support Group (SSG) that aligns the activities of all school committees and is focused on student support; the Events Protocol for addressing student incidents School Attendance Committee that develops and implements plans to address attendance and lateness issues with identified students and families  Parent outreach, home visits, onsite mental health services and case management, social worker follow-up   Partnerships with local community based organizations (e.g. National Dance Institute, Chess in the Schools, Formalized program to focus on positive student behavior and achievement (Rock-It-Bucks) Studio In A School) that provide students with non-academic experiences for success and recognition  Outreach efforts to local domestic violence shelters  Crisis Team that utilizes a school developed Events protocol for responding to incidents  Per session funds will be used to provide an Expanded Learning Time program for all students in the school.  Success Mentor program which engages students with a caring adult in the school Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 RSCEP-R 39  Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, school wide structures and systems for student support will result in a reduction of 10% compared to the previous year in the number of students who exhibit inappropriate behaviors as measured by reported Level 4 and Level 5 incidents on the OORS online reporting system. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Online OORS reporting system, ongoing reviews to monitor behavior occurrences by the Student Support Group Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 40  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed x x x x 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? School Strengths  Teams of teachers are working collaboratively, along with consultant coaches and school administration, to develop curriculum aligned to the Common Core and instructional shifts, embedding cross-content curricula and tasks when possible, with suitable assessments to monitor student performance and progress. Teachers are provided with weekly time to participate in grade level teacher teams. In addition, teachers are scheduled for further common preparation periods with colleagues on their grade to encourage additional grade level collaboration  A Teacher Resource Center has been established in the school, staffed by a math/data coach and consultant coaches in literacy and technology. Teachers use this resource space to work with colleagues on their grade and across grades to hold team meetings, get help with lesson and unit creation and creating of curriculum maps and pacing calendars.  Key elements that all staff must include in each lesson and daily lesson plans are required and are to be accessible at any time for both informal and formal observations. Teachers identified by ADVANCE as ‘developing’ are required to use a specific lesson template for all planning.  Teachers are using workshop model teaching – in which there is time to model “I do” and “We do” for supervised group practice, "You do” for independent practice – to provide clarity to teaching and set clear expectations for student work  Teachers receive job embedded ongoing opportunities for professional learning in the area of literacy, math, technology and differentiating instruction.  Grade wide and individual data conferences at which teachers and administrators discuss student progress and school/grade trends, promote uniform approach and consistency in practice in instruction. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 41   Staff have opportunities for leadership roles, such as serving as grade leaders, serving on the vertical Instructional Cabinet, serving on school committees (Student Support Group, Attendance Committee, Crisis Intervention Team) and providing professional learning opportunities for colleagues.  Multiple and varied opportunities for professional learning are organized (Monday and Tuesday afternoons, after-school, and during the day for intensive planning, inter-visitations, attending workshops) so that teachers can - become self reflective - participate as a community of learners - use formative and summative data to inform planning - define and implement connected practices, - share expertise - engage in process learning - use school wide defined protocols (for data dives, curriculum planning, student work) Data: Collaborative Teachers  Quality Review - A Quality Review was conducted in May 2018. Data from this QR is not yet available. This document will be updated when the data is released. Below is data from a January 2017 QR. In the area of 4.2 - Teacher Teams and Leadership Development, the 2016 - 17 Quality Review found that "teacher teams are engaged in structured professional collaborations and regularly analyze student work through and inquiry process. Teachers benefit from a variety of distributed leadership opportunities to research effective instructional techniques, and they play an integral role in key decisions that affect student learning. " The Impact of the findings states that "teacher team collaboration and distributed leadership strengthen the instructional capacity of teachers resulting in school wide instructional coherence and increased student achievement. Rating: Proficient  The 2016 - 17 School Survey - Collaborative Teachers - Note: This information will be updated when 2017 - 18 data is available. Parents:  90% of parents agreed that they feel well informed by the communications they receive from the school  94% of parents agreed that their child's school communicated with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. Teachers: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 42   93% of teachers agreed that teachers in their school trust each other.  100% of teachers agreed that teachers respect other teachers who take the lead in school improvement efforts  95% of teachers agreed that they feel respected by other teachers at the school  95% of teachers agreed that professional staff believes that all students can learn, including ELLs and SWD  100% of teachers agreed that students with disabilities are included in all school activities  100% of teachers agreed that they had the resources they needed to include multiple opportunities for students to interact with complex, grade-level texts, and to interact with academic language.  93% of teachers agreed that they had resources they needed to include multiple opportunities for reading and writing experiences grounded in evidence from text  100% of teachers agreed that they had the resources they need in math and science to focus deeply on concepts, to build on previous learning, and for developing students' conceptual understanding , procedural fluency and ability to apply math in context. Needs/Priority Areas of Focus  Teacher teams continue to build capacity around curriculum planning. However, there is a need to hone teachers’ skills in using this venue to further their work by developing and implementing school wide consistent protocols for looking at student work to inform instructional planning.  Developing teachers continue to need intensive coaching and opportunities for improving pedagogical skills.  Teachers need to continue to develop a learning environment that differentiates instruction to meet the needs of all students.  The social/emotional and academic needs of all students needs to be at the forefront of all efforts by all staff members all the time.  Needs of subgroups (ELLs, SWD) that may not be performing to standard need to be addressed by teachers throughout the year. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? The staff works collaboratively as a community of learners focused on all aspects of student welfare - social/emotional and academic. Teachers choose to utilize additional common prep time to work collaboratively and plan, to discuss student’s needs, and to develop lessons. At the end of the renewal period, we envision the following:  The school is organized to ensure that teacher schedules support collaboration for sharing of best practices and engaging in professional learning.  The director of our Renewal Program and partner staff attend teacher planning sessions and professional learning times fully engaged as members of our staff so that the ELT is aligned with the school focus and goals. The school's renewal partner is an integral part of the school community and is able to promote school initiatives.  Consultant coaches, data specialist work intensively with teachers to enhance teaching practice that is focused  on individual student needs and achievement. Students receive academic intervention services (AIS) according to their specific needs, provided by AIS teachers who know students well, and through online literacy and math programs that customize activities for each students.  Data is at the basis of all instructional initiatives and teaching plans and drives the instructional program.  A model of distributive leadership is developed in which teacher leaders and data specialist are encouraged to take key leadership roles. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 43  There is consistency and coherency of practice as you walk through the halls and into classrooms and see authentic student work with common themes across grades, uniform use of rubrics with effective feedback, and classroom lessons around the same unit.  Class and grade administered assessments collaboratively designed by teacher teams, informs units, lessons and teaching, and shows next steps needed for all students to achieve mastery. How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? The Instructional Cabinet is made up of teachers from across the grades, coaches, principal and assistant principals. Cabinet members work collaboratively to establish a common lens and common language around the process of Data Wise as developed by Harvard and the Boston Public Schools. The Data Wise process enables the instructional cabinet to create uniform systems and structures for managing teacher team meetings, understanding how data drives instructional initiatives, developing assessment literacy between and among all staff so staff knows what they are looking at and why data is being used to inform their work. The cabinet also develops uniform protocols for examining student work and planning curriculum to maximize the impact on student achievement. This develops teacher leader practices as roles will be rotated for greater accountability and engagement in the process. Using established protocols, the cabinet is actively involved in making collaborative decisions on a variety of instructional and procedural areas to ensure high quality instructional practice in an environment that promotes effective and efficient operations. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? School-wide teacher team norms and protocols are developed so that each team member understands his/her responsibility as a member of the team, and holds himself/herself and others accountable for the work. Ongoing feedback in the form of pluses (what worked) and deltas (challenges/next steps) to monitor teacher team progress/efficiency. Teachers on the grade have shared responsibility for the effectiveness and relevance of the meetings so that student achievement is at the forefront. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Common norms, a common agenda, common protocols and a common teacher team reflection form are available In the teacher resource center to teams from other grades. Cross-grade curriculum teams are organized as well as grade level teams. The literacy coaches and teacher leaders who assist in the facilitation of team meetings bring the school-wide message to teams across grades. At whole school professional development sessions, team meeting information is shared between and among team members across grades. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Administered in the fall, winter and spring, these data provide information on student achievement/progress in reading, math, writing. They identify target skills/areas in which the student is having difficulty. The benchmark assessments are aligned to the standards Intent Data Reviewed Interim assessment benchmark data ( math benchmark, ELL Periodic Assessment, Fountas & Pinnell, Go Math/CMP3 Math Assessments) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 44  Accelerated Reader online assessment – grades 2 - 8 Provides information about student Lexile progress for reading comprehension. Identifies students challenges and strengths; provides skill specific needs to enable effective curriculum planning and re-teaching. IReady Assessment Reading and Math progress in skill development. Enables teachers to design skill specific lessons, to re-teach, to plan curriculum Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, as a result of teacher collaboration, students will demonstrate increased achievement on NYSED Math Standardized examinations as measured by an Average Proficiency Rating in Math of 2.37. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? The following renewal benchmarks are expected to improve: Average Math Proficiency Rating The following Leading Indicator is expected to improve: Framework: Collaborative Teachers 2018-19 RSCEP-R 45 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) All teachers Average Math Proficiency, Collaborative Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Assistant principals, grade leaders, consultant coaches Interim assessments in reading, math; Review of Team Meeting minutes Identified teachers Average Math Proficiency, Collaborative Teachers October 2018 - June 2019 Assistant principals, grade leaders, consultant coaches Interim assessments in reading, math; Review of Team Meeting minutes All teachers Average Math Proficiency, Collaborative Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Assistant principals, grade leaders, consultant coaches Interim assessments in reading, math; Review of Team Meeting minutes Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. TEACHER TEAMS/CURRICULUM PLANNING -Grade Level Team Meetings plus common preps will be utilized for professional development, and for teachers to collaboratively plan instruction to meet student needs. Distributive Leadership will be developed in the meeting structure. Each week, one teacher will be assigned to lead the meeting; a second will be assigned to keep minutes to be shared across the grade. The roles will change weekly.primary responsibility for facilitating will be on a regular basis to ensure that meetings are productive and meeting teacher needs, and school initiatives. The Data Wise protocol, a formal process for guiding discussions, taking minutes, and planning for upcoming meetings will be utilized by each grade level team. Teachers will utilize school-wide protocols in Curriculum Planning, Looking at Student Work, and Review of Data, to inform and promote 2018-19 RSCEP-R 46  coherent instructional practices across the school, decision making, student groupings, and any and all decisions around effective teaching and learning. In the middle school, team meetings will include either subject matter teachers across middle school grades, or cross-curricular teachers on a grade. Inquiry Groups will meet on Monday afternoon Professional Learning Time and using the Data Wise Protocol will investigate topics of interest/need including the following: Math Discourse, Word Work, Vocabulary Building. COACHING -Coaches will work in-class with teachers, facilitate inquiry groups and grade level team meetings, and also provide workshops. They will guide the development of unit and lesson plans as per grade level curriculum maps and pacing calendars. Teachers are held responsible for implementing strategies developed through coaching. Evidence of implementation is reflected in ADVANCE reports from formal and informal observations. DATA DRIVEN INSTRUCTION Middle school teachers on a grade and by subject area All teachers Average Math Proficiency, Collaborative Teachers Average Math Proficiency, Collaborative Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Assistant principals, grade leaders, consultant coaches Interim assessments in reading, math; October 2018 - May 2019 Assistant Principals, consultant coaches Review of Team Meeting minutes Classroom Observation of Practice, Inquiry Group Minutes All teachers Average Math Proficiency, Collaborative Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Consultant Coaches (ELA - 2 times per week; Math-2 times per week) assistant principals, principal Classroom Observation of Practice - Grade level and individual data conferences will be held with classroom and out-of-classroom teachers, including teachers who are providing ELT. Teachers will Teachers on a grade and subject area teachers Average Math Proficiency, Collaborative Teachers Three times per year (fall, winter, spring) Principal, assistant principal iReady Growth Data 2018-19 RSCEP-R 47  maintain data binders that include information on each student’s progress/challenges. - Meetings with the consultant coach will be held on each grade and at whole-faculty meetings to discuss student progress/student needs, grade level and school trends. A binder of data reports created for each grade will be created to serve as a data resource. Grade level teachers Average Math Proficiency, Collaborative Teachers November - May Data Coach, Assistant Principals Review of data binders, data meetings with teachers - Portfolio Review - students and teachers will reflect on student portfolio work three times per year Classroom teachers and special teachers Average Math Proficiency, Collaborative Teachers Fall, winter, spring Assistant Principals Student Portfolios Checklists – A series of checklists are utilized by the principal and assistant principal when visiting classrooms. The Checklists will provide the teachers with clear expectations as to what is expected across the grades (e.g. Bulletin Board Checklist, Classroom Environment Checklist). The data gleaned from the checklists are discussed with teachers at whole faculty meetings. Teachers can refer to the checklists when planning instruction. - Reteach Fridays/Test Prep Fridays will be instituted. Topics will be derived from analysis of student work data from the week and students will be grouped flexibly according to needs. RUBRICS - School wide task specific rubrics on a number of topics (e.g. writing) will guide teachers’ understanding of standards bearing student work. Engage NY can be utilized Classroom teachers Average Math Proficiency, Collaborative Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Assistant principals, principal Classroom observations of practice All classes Average Math Proficiency, Collaborative Teachers October 2018 - June 2019 Assistant principals Review of lesson plans All classes Average Math Proficiency, Collaborative Teachers October 2018 - June 2019 Assistant principals, principal Classroom observations, review of curriculum maps 2018-19 RSCEP-R 48  as a resource and guide for developing these rubrics. PACING CALENDARS IN LITERACY AND MATH are maintained on Atlas Rubicon so that there is cohesiveness of instruction across all curriculum areas and grades, and between cluster teachers and regular classroom teachers. Teachers will work in teams to revise the pacing calendars. Building Capacity/ Distributive Leadership -Consultant Literacy and Math Coaches and data coach -Coaches will work with teachers to provide support and promote excellence in the instructional program, so that teachers can turn-key instructional strategies during grade level and subject area meetings. - Instructional Cabinet (Professional Learning Committee)- A vertical instructional cabinet will meet bi-monthly to discuss and plan instructional topics, school direction, activities - Distributive Leadership Committees /Teams- The school will continue to have relevant teams made up of teachers and other staff members to address students’ needs (Student Support Group, Attendance Committee) to ensure that students who are identified for social/emotional supports, attendance outreach, receive appropriate support and follow up. All grades Average Math Proficiency, Collaborative Teachers October 2018 - May 2019 Grade level teachers, assistant principals Atlas Rubicon review Teachers across grades and subject areas Average Math Proficiency, Collaborative Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Coaches, assistant principals, principal iReady interim assessments in literacy and math Average Math Proficiency, Collaborative Teachers One teacher per grade, coaches, assistant principals October 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals Average Math Proficiency, Collaborative Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, community school director Student support teacher, renewal partner staff, guidance counselor, IEP teacher Review of school planning documents created (e.g. assessment calendar, professional development calendar) OORS reports, review of meeting minutes/next steps 2018-19 RSCEP-R 49 Teachers across grades Average Math Proficiency, Collaborative Teachers October 2018 - May 2019 Coaches, assistant principals, principal Inquiry group minutes/feedback; classroom observation of practice Inquiry Groups/Teacher designed/led professional development- Teachers will have a voice in their own professional learning and will make decisions about professional learning activities; they will design and organize professional learning experiences with colleagues of similar interests/needs 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Tuesday Afternoon Parent Outreach - Tuesday afternoons are reserved for parent outreach. During that time parents are able to speak with teachers via telephone or by making an appointment to meet with the teacher at the school. During that time parents can ask questions about individual concerns and get information pertaining to his/her child. Pastries With The Principal sessions are held monthly. At that time important information is disseminated regarding instruction and curriculum as well as other topics. Parents get to know the principal on a personal level resulting in greater parent engagement. Sip and Learn Sessions - Monthly parent workshops are held on a variety of topics. The sessions are organized by the school's Renewal Partner. Topics include Handling Stress, Helping Your Child With Homework, Understanding Your Child's IEP. Success Mentors and Family Coach - Renewal staff conduct home visits, meet with parents at the school and speak via telephone daily. The family coach works with all parents in the school, especially parents of newly admitted students. The Success Mentors interact primarily with students and parents of students who are having difficulty in school and with attendance. Parent Newsletters - Monthly Grade Level Parent Newsletters, created by teachers on a grade, will be distributed to provide parents with the information they need to understand what their child is learning and be prepared for upcoming events. In addition, the principal and Renewal Partner will send parent newsletters periodically on a variety of topics as need arises. Social Support Services - A variety of services will be provided by Wellness Center staff, Guidance Counselor and Social Worker, Renewal Success Mentors, partnerships with community based organizations (e.g. Cuddleduds, Home Base, Mayor's Office of Consumer Affairs, Graham Windham Children's Home Health Program, NYS Office of Children and Family Services, Administration of Children's Services) to enable parents to become engaged in the education of their children. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 50  The following resources will be leveraged to achieve the goal: ·Consultant and school coaches will provide support for teacher learning. · Engage NY will serve as a resource for instruction and assessment in mathematics. · Graham Windham staff will provide support for the ELT program, attendance improvement initiatives and parent outreach. · Collaborative Teacher Team Meetings and Protocols will be scheduled weekly. · A School schedule that includes time for collaborative learning will be established. · Professional Development Cycles will focus on teacher learning needs and will include Inquiry Groups organized by interest · Professional Learning Committee (Instructional Cabinet) will meet regularly to collaboratively guide the instructional and professional learning programs -Site specific specialists (guidance counselor, IEP teacher) will support students social/emotional development. - Social service partner organizations will support students and families in the affective domain. - Per Session and Per Diem funds will be used to support after school and school-day professional learning. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, as a result of teacher collaboration, students will demonstrate increased achievement in mathematics as demonstrated by 30% of students achieving their iReady Growth Targets. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. iReady assessment administered in the fall and winter. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 51  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? As a strong instructional leader, it has been a priority of the principal to improve the instructional programs at PS/MS 123. The principal is committed to creating a successful school community, and this commitment is the foundation for all of the school’s work. The principal takes a hands-on approach being visible in the school, meeting with teachers and parents, being a good listener and asking staff for input, inviting parents into the school for planning, for celebrations and meetings around their children’s needs. The principal is focused on creating a transparent environment where the goals and expectations for teaching and learning are known by all, and the necessary supports are in place. This practice continues in all areas and continued meetings with staff and parents are held in order to gain every one's perspective to help in developing clear next steps and goals for the coming school year. Strong leadership has resulted in the school being removed from the Priority Schools List and the Persistently Dangerous Schools List. The principal has led the staff in defining a Problem of Practice and Theory of Action to guide the instructional foci. Data The 2016-17 School Quality Review Report rated the school Proficient in the area of Systems for Improvement with the following conclusions (Note: data for the May 2018 QR has not yet been released): 2018-19 RSCEP-R 52  1.3 - The school makes strategic organizational decisions to support the school's instructional goals and meet student learning needs, as evidenced by meaningful student work products  3.1 - The school establishes a coherent vision of school improvement that is reflected in a short list of focused, data-based goals that are tracked for progress and are understood and supported by the entire community.  4.1 - The school observes teachers using the Danielson Framework for Teaching along with the analysis of learning outcomes to elevate school-wide instructional practices and implement strategies that promote professional growth and reflection  4.2 - The school engages in structured professional collaborations on teams sing an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning  5.2 - The school evaluates the quality of school level decisions, making adjustments as needed to increase the coherence of policies and practices across the school, with particular attention to the CCLS. The 2017 - 18 Principal Performance Observation included the following observations and comments: Area 1.1 - Ensure engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and/or content standards  You and your staff ensure that curricula is aligned to CCLS and content standards and strategically integrate the instructional shifts across grades and subjects (i.e. Math, Reading, Writing, Science, Social Studies). Curriculum maps, unit plans, and lesson plans reflect adoption of the school’s instructional priorities (deepening students’ knowledge, discourse-Math Talks, ownership of learning, and ensuring differentiation is purposeful) and data driven.  Curricula and academic tasks support rigorous habits and higher-order skills, as a result of explicit work that you are engaging your teachers around task analysis and ensuring adjustment and modifications that reflect needed curricula changes.  This process promotes college and career readiness for all students and supports individual and groups of students’ (including ELLs, SWDs, and high achieving students) access to the curricula and tasks. (1.1) Area 1.3 - Make strategic organizational decisions to support the school’s instructional goals and meet student learning needs, as evidenced by meaningful student work products  The school leader strategically utilizes organizational resources to support their instructional goals with a focus on increasing student outcomes. You have organized the school’s budget, schedule and instructional programs, and technology to address the student learning needs that you and the leadership team have identified through ongoing analysis of varied assessments, student work products and patterns from classroom observations.  Teachers’ time is deliberately structured to focus upon instructional work and the collaborative development of engaging, rigorous learning experiences for students that is supported by a school-based instructional coach and assistant principals. Area 1.4 - Maintain a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults Area 3.4 - Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations  You have created an inclusive environment where students are supported by the staff and their voices are valued, resulting in students’ academic and social-emotional success. Student voice and leadership are encouraged through structures put in place and meet on a regular basis to discuss various student issues with your administration and staff. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 53   Your efforts toward family outreach and engagement includes a clear focus on celebrating student successes. There are parent coordinator workshops, partnerships, newsletters and formal and informal conversations. You stress the importance of not just student attendance but teacher attendance as well.  There are school wide structures for encouraging and highlighting consistent attendance and positive behavior Expectations around student success are communicated in memos, staff handbook, classroom visits, in person and via various media. Area 2.2 - Align assessments to curricula, use on-going assessment and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels Area 4.2 - Engage in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach9 that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning  The school leader continues to use “Data Wise” framework and protocols to guide the teacher team meetings school wide.  The leader has developed an interim assessment calendar for the entire school year and has a system in place to monitor student progress across grades and content areas.  The principal ensures that the school wide professional development calendar is aligned to the assessment calendar to make certain teachers are engaged in rigorous content connected to teacher and student needs.  The leader closely monitors Ready and iReady diagnostic data three times per year and provide teachers and  students with feedback on implementation, progress and performance. Student work is prominently displayed around the school building with rubrics to provide targeted feedback to ensure students are clear about their next steps in the learning process. Area 4.2 - Engage in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach9 that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning Area 5.1 - Evaluate the quality of school-level decisions, making adjustments as needed to increase the coherence of policies and practices across the school, with particular attention to the CCLS  The school leader has consistent process in place to monitor, revise and refine teaching, learning, and curricular expectations.  The school has transparent structures in place to ensure that students are on track for college and career readiness.  Additionally, the principal regularly monitors the effectiveness of teacher teams by engaging in the Data Wise alongside her teachers and provide them with feedback as needed. The School Survey Responses in the Effective School Leadership section of the 2016 - 17 School Survey include the following (Note: 2017 - 18 School Survey data has not yet been released):  93% of parents agreed that the principal encourages feedback from parents  94% of parents agreed that the principal is strongly committed to shared decision making  93% of parents agreed that the school leader works to create a sense of community in the school  95% of parents agreed that the principal promotes family and community involvement in the school  93% of parents agreed that they feel respected by their child's principal  91% of parents agreed that they trust the principal at her word  92% of parents agreed that the principal is an effective manager who makes the school run smoothly  94% of parents agreed that the principal works hard to build trusting relationships with parents 2018-19 RSCEP-R 54  Teacher responses for the Effective School Leadership section of the School Survey include the following:  98% of teachers agree that the principal at this school sets high standards for student learning.  93% of teachers agree that the principal at this school carefully tracks student academic progress. School Strengths-Because of the principal’s many years’ experience as a teacher across the grades, a staff developer at the school and district level, a curriculum developer, and as an assistant principal for instruction, she is a principal who is not only a strong school manager, but also an instructional leader. She can therefore provide informal, relevant, and targeted guidance for PS/MS 123M teachers on a daily basis during classroom walkthroughs, during observation conferences, and at committee and team meetings. This strong and deep understanding of how children and adults learn, of instructional strategies, and of curriculum, places the school at a great advantage as she works collaboratively with all stakeholders to design programs and initiatives to make PS/MS 123M a place where resources are maximized, and where students are safe, engaged in learning, and families feel welcomed.  As the school leader, the principal is committed to data driven leadership. Decisions regarding instructional, professional development, student support, and parent engagement programs and initiatives are based on what is learn from hard data (e.g. test scores, interim assessment results, evidence on school developed checklists) and soft data (e.g. teacher observation, teacher discussions at collaborative team meetings, conversations at individual and grade level data conferences). These data drive school-wide and individual grade decisions.  The administrative team at PS/MS 123 is a cohesive group that provides clear expectations for each staff member and models expected behaviors. The team is continually focused on the high expectations we have set for ourselves, staff, and students.  An innovative and effective Table of Organization has been developed that includes classroom and out-of-classroom positions to support the needs of all students, including English language learners, students with disabilities, high achieving students, and struggling students.  Budgets are structured to maximize available funding to support desired initiatives (e.g. Lead Teachers, Dean, AIS teachers, Coaching, programs in the arts).  Opportunities for staff to take on leadership roles exist across the school through membership on and leadership of school committees and teams and through designing and guiding professional learning opportunities.  Clear expectations are provided for staff via the following: o Daily classroom visits that include Glows and Grows feedback o A Comprehensive Staff Handbook, weekly staff memos, and a system of numbered memos to inform all staff of school-wide comprehensive initiatives o Regularly scheduled data conferences at which time teachers meet either on a grade or individually to discuss individual student progress and needs o High standards communicated informally and through formal letters to file when indicated o Weekly Staff Notes distributed via Internet to all school staff 2017-18 Needs/Areas of Focus  Use of data to differentiate instruction  Questioning/discussion strategies in all classrooms   Professional learning opportunities, customized to teachers' needs.  More universal use of Data Wise to establish standardized protocols for team meetings to maximize efficiency Student Engagement, Guided Reading and effectiveness of teacher teams  Promote distributive leadership among teachers  Work closely with school security officers to ensure building security and safety 2018-19 RSCEP-R 55  Improve effectiveness of Collaborative Team Teacher classes   Collaborate with community based organizations to improve attendance Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? At the end of the renewal period, the principal envisions the following:  Renewal staff and school staff collaborate closely for the betterment of the school community. This will be accomplished through weekly meetings with partner director. At these meetings activities will be planned and responsibility designated to team members. The team will also assess success of implementation of activities and initiatives. Through focused , regularly scheduled conversations we look forward to identifying and implementing additional ways in which Graham Windham as a key resource can help achieve school goals, both in instruction and in addressing the social/emotional needs of students and families.  Regular data analysis and data meetings continue to be implemented so that data becomes the foundation of all instruction and school-wide initiatives. The data meetings take place with teachers, support staff, assistant principals, partner staff and SLT members.  Protocols to maintain a transparent school program continue with regular memos, newsletters, letters to staff  and members of the school community. Improvement of school operational systems through the establishment of new systems and protocols for operational needs (e.g. smooth operation of general office, distribution of supplies).  A focus on distributive leadership so that all school staff embrace leadership roles. Weekly meetings with the assistant principals, coaches, renewal director and key partner staff (i.e. social worker, family coach, ELT staff) where principal will delegate responsibilities, and share data regarding implementation of renewal efforts.  Utilizing established protocols, administrators meet Monday morning to review upcoming events, identify roles and responsibilities for each administrator, set a week long schedule of observations and any other identified priorities, and then engage in daily check-ins with each other to ensure timeliness and adherence to effectively meeting deadlines and addressing needs. Student progress and classroom teaching are at the forefront of all efforts. Administrators maintain an active role in ensuring that systems are in place and used to support the school as a community of learners.   Use of online resources for differentiating student learning, monitoring student progress, and promoting  communication across the school and between the school and home is expanded and seamless. Fiscal resources across funding sources available to the school and renewal partner are aligned to maximize available budgets to provide needed services. On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? As principal, I plan to focus on  developing specific educational initiatives and scaffolded professional learning that promote independent learning and exemplary instructional practice  using a gradual release of responsibility model, move towards more sharing of leadership  providing opportunities for students to take on leadership roles and become responsible for their own learning  using standardized protocols for team meetings using Data Wise to make meetings more focused and effective   training teachers on discussion techniques to more effectively engage students in their own learning creating leaders in the community (teachers, parents, students) and develop and nurture leadership roles for them. spending time with parents to get to know more of them personally  2018-19 RSCEP-R 56  What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? A variety of strategies will be utilized for ensuring a normed and shared understanding of the schools vision and instructional focus including:  utilizing Data Wise school-wide protocols for meetings, student data analysis, etc.  communicating vision/mission in actions and instructional initiatives through regular communication practices including online platforms (e.g. weekly staff bulletins, numbered memos) implementing whole school professional development sessions   developing Instructional Cabinet members who can assist in developing school goals and initiative, turnkey information and professional learning with colleagues  utilizing standardized school checklists regarding instructional and pedagogical expectations  refining a detailed staff handbook distributed to all staff members at the beginning of the school year What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? Team Meetings - Teachers will take on a more active role in leading teacher team meetings and providing professional development for colleagues on their grade. Team meetings will utilize school-developed meeting protocols'; take on leadership roles with standardized expectations Instructional Cabinet members, who represent all grades in the school will develop school plans and initiatives and turn key training to colleagues on their grade Teacher Inquiry Groups in which teachers study and become expert at a specific instructional area/topic that they share with colleagues Student Support Group and Attendance Committee – staff members facilitate the meetings, design agendas, develop plan of action Model Classrooms - Effective teachers will open their classrooms to colleagues for inter-visitations. They will also meet with colleagues during preparation periods and during team meeting time to assist colleagues in enhancing instruction. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? Collaborative school governance will be fostered through the School Leadership Team subcommittees, monthly meetings with Parents Association officers, regularly scheduled meetings with UFT representative, and through weekly Think Tank meetings with the school’s renewal partner. Collaboration occurs throughout various committees with stakeholders from our partner programs YMCA, Beacon, Graham Windham and leadership weekly to plan events, discuss concerns and school climate and culture. Vertical teams and horizontal teacher teams engage in weekly meetings to plan curricula, discuss data trends and use student work protocol using our Data Wise framework. How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy 2018-19 RSCEP-R 57 Feedback will be provided in writing an via conferences with the principal and/or assistant principal in two to three weeks Feedback will be based on observations of the lesson with evidence cited in the written feedback document. Support for struggling teachers will be provided by the teacher leaders, literacy coach, and data specialist with follow up by the principal and assistant principal. Frequency of teacher observations will depend on the Advance Option selected by the individual teacher. - Teachers who select Option 1 will receive at least 1 formal observation and 3 informal observations. - Teachers who select Option 2 will receive at least 6 informal observations - Teachers who select Option 3 (Highly Effective Teachers only) will receive at least 3 informal observations and three classroom visits - Teachers who select Option 4 (Effective Teachers only) will receive at least 4 informal observations. Observations will be spaced throughout the school year. Teachers who have been designated TIP (Teacher Improvement Plan) will receive a greater number of observations. What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Team meeting agendas and minutes Team meeting protocol documents, coaching, school-wide professional development Assistant principal, teacher leaders, coaches 2018-19 RSCEP-R 58  Curriculum maps, pacing calendars, bulletin boards, and lesson plans Class student data binders Team meeting protocol documents, coaching, school-wide professional development Data binder format documents, coaching, school-wide professional development Assistant principals, coaches, principal Assistant principal, teacher leaders, coaches, data specialist How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? A consolidated approach to budgeting will be utilized within guidelines of funding streams to maintain small class sizes, a variety of specialty teachers (e.g. art, vocal music, technology, student support dean), additional extended day/extended week programming, online learning resources, Saturday family events, and student support staff. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June, 2019 as a result of professional learning, 60% of teachers will receive a rating of Effective on MOSL. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve The following Renewal Benchmarks are expected to improve: Average Math Proficiency Rating, Average ELA Proficiency Rating The following Leading Indicators are expected to improve: Framework: Collaborative Teachers, Framework: Strong Family-Community Ties 2018-19 RSCEP-R 59 How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) OORS reports, iReady ELA and Math interim assessments July 2018 - June 2019 Principal iReady Interim Assessments in ELA and Math Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) July 2018 - June 2019 Principal All teachers, and students Teachers, students Average Math Proficiency Rating, Average ELA Proficiency Rating; Framework: Collaborative Teachers, Framework: Strong Family-Community Ties Average Math Proficiency Rating, Average ELA Proficiency Rating; Framework: Collaborative Teachers, Framework: Strong Family-Community Ties EFFECTIVE USE OF RESOURCES A Table of Organization for the school will reflect the needs of the student population relative to class designation and teacher assignments. The Table will take into account services for Students With Disabilities (SWD), maintaining smaller class size, and providing support personnel needed to ensure student success. Consolidated Budgeting - The strategy of consolidated budgeting will be utilized to maximize fiscal resources to match needed positions and services. Services will include - consultant coaches in literacy, math and instructional technology - data specialist teacher funded to serve all grades -dean position to provide support services to students who have difficulty with behavior 2018-19 RSCEP-R 60  - supplement the ELT programs with a Saturday Program and an ENL program - purchase additional instructional supplies to meet the needs of all students, including ELLs and SWDs. - establish and outfit a new media center to serve students across the grades Partnerships Partnerships with successful CBOs will be established/continued to provide professional learning for teachers, and services for students and parents (detailed information regarding school partners is provided in other sections of this document) SHARED VISION/ DATA DRIVEN LEADERSHIP Leadership decisions and actions will be based on a review of existing data such as - ADVANCE ratings and teacher observations - Teacher conferences (e.g. goal setting conferences, Individual Planning Conferences, data conferences, pre and post-observation conferences) - Expressed teacher needs Teachers, students, parents Framework: Collaborative Teachers, Framework: Strong Family-Community Ties Principal September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, assistant princpals Teachers, students, parents Average Math Proficiency Rating, Average ELA Proficiency Rating; Framework: Collaborative Teachers iReady interim assessments, classroom observations, review of committee minutes iReady interim assessment data in ELA and Math, review of school team minutes 2018-19 RSCEP-R 61  - Student performance on interim assessments - Success of parent engagement efforts - Reports from Renewal School partner, consultant coaches, etc. - School Leadership Team (SLT), Student Support Group (SSG), Attendance Team, Community Education Team minutes and agendas - Weekly AP meetings to set goals for the week and to assess implementation of the goals on a Friday meeting. - Review of pacing calendars, curriculum maps, yearlong assessment calendar, professional development calendar CLEAR EXPECTATIONS Clear expectations for se provided through a variety of structures: - Staff Handbook – A comprehensive staff handbook Idistributed in September so that teachers understand what is expected. The Handbook also containS needed forms, school checklists to be utilized, rubrics, etc. - Weekly Staff Newsletter – A staff newsletter designed in a newspaper format will continue to be distributed to staff. The newsletter contains relevant information needed for the upcoming week, planned events, "shout-outs" to highlight good teaching. September 2018 Principal September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, assistant principals iReady interim assessments in ELA and Math, classroom observations iReady interim assessments in ELA and Math, classroom observations All staff members All staff members Average Math Proficiency Rating, Average ELA Proficiency Rating; Framework: Collaborative Teachers, Framework: Strong Family-Community Ties Average Math Proficiency Rating, Average ELA Proficiency Rating; Framework: Collaborative Teachers, Framework: Strong Family-Community Ties 2018-19 RSCEP-R 62 Principal September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, assistant principals September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, assistant principals September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, community schools director, instructional cabinet members iReady interim assessments in ELA and Math, classroom observations iReady interim assessments in ELA and Math, classroom observations iReady interim assessments in ELA and Math, classroom observations iReady interim assessments, review of school committees and school teams minutes Average Math Proficiency Rating, Average ELA Proficiency Rating; Framework: Collaborative Teachers, Framework: Strong Family-Community Ties Average Math Proficiency Rating, Average ELA Proficiency Rating; Framework: Collaborative Teachers, Framework: Strong Family-Community Ties Average Math Proficiency Rating, Average ELA Proficiency Rating; Framework: Collaborative Teachers, Framework: Strong Family-Community Ties Average Math Proficiency Rating, Average ELA Proficiency Rating; Framework: Collaborative Teachers, Framework: Strong Family-Community Ties - Daily message board reminders to staff of urgent items for the day. The message board is located in the general office next to the time clock. All staff members - School-wide Checklists are discussed and distributed to staff so they understand what is expected (e.g. Classroom library checklist, Bulletin Board Checklist). Teachers, support staff All staff members Teachers, students, parents - Numbered Staff Memos – Memos intended for the entire staff are distributed and numbered and kept in a binder that is accessible to all staff to provide them with information needed for a variety of initiatives (e.g. report cards, supply orders, extended day) - School Year Events Calendar – A school-year calendar is distributed to staff in September. The calendar includes all DOE activities (e.g. testing, parent/teacher conferences) as well as school activities (e.g. NDI schedule, ELT schedule, interim assessment schedule, parent engagement activities). A separate calendar is sent to parents with relevant information regarding report cards, testing, and dates for parent engagement activities so they have ample time to prepare to attend. - Verbal Feedback, Letters and Emails to Teachers – Verbal feedback, and/or All staff members Average Math Proficiency Rating, Average ELA September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, assistant principals iReady interim assessments in ELA and Math, 2018-19 RSCEP-R 63  letters and emails to teachers for praise for a job well done as well as for instances when teachers are not meeting expectations are sent promptly. SCHOOL COMMITTEES SCHOOL COMMITTEES – As described in previous sections, a variety of school committees (e.g., Student Support Committee, Attendance Committee, Instructional Cabinet) will be created to Teachers, renewal partner staff, school support staff Proficiency Rating; Framework: Collaborative Teachers, Framework: Strong Family-Community Ties Average Math Proficiency Rating, Average ELA Proficiency Rating; Framework: Collaborative Teachers, Framework: Strong Family-Community Ties September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, community schools director classroom observations iReady interim assessments, OORS reports, review of school committees and school teams minutes - Provide needed services for students (e.g. social/emotional supports, effective learning opportunities) - Engage teachers and other school staff in the decision making process - Develop teachers as leaders who can serve as a resource for their colleagues, and allow for distributed leadership opportunities TEACHER LEARNING Job embedded, customized opportunities for teachers to improve their practice · Onsite coaches in literacy, math and technology work with small groups of teachers, individually with teachers in their classrooms, and on Weekly Common Planning Teams. Consultant literacy and math coaches will work two times per week. Teachers across grades and subject areas Average Math Proficiency Rating, Average ELA Proficiency Rating; Framework: Collaborative Teachers, Framework: Strong Family-Community Ties August 2018 - June 2019 Coaches, assistant principals, principal iReady interim assessments, OORS reports, review of school committees and school teams minutes 2018-19 RSCEP-R 64 Teachers across grades and subject areas All staff members All staff members · Individual and Grade Level teacher conferences –conferences are held on a variety of topics/issues (student support strategies, instructional strategies, utilizing data effectively, ADVANCE ratings). These conferences also serve to reinforce clear and high expectations that are held for all staff. · Workshops - special whole staff and/or small group workshops re provided as needed (e.g. testing information). Offsite professional learning opportunities (e.g. intervisitations to partner schools, citywide trainings, Teachers' College Calendar days) are facilitated for teachers across grades and subject areas Assistant principals - Weekly Assistant Principal Professional Development Conferences are scheduled for Monday mornings to plan and set clear expectations, with an assessment follow up on Friday afternoons 4b – Parent and Family Engagement Average Math Proficiency Rating, Average ELA Proficiency Rating; Framework: Collaborative Teachers, Framework: Strong Family-Community Ties Average Math Proficiency Rating, Average ELA Proficiency Rating; Framework: Collaborative Teachers, Average Math Proficiency Rating, Average ELA Proficiency Rating; Framework: Collaborative Teachers, Framework: Strong Family-Community Ties Average Math Proficiency Rating, Average ELA Proficiency Rating; Framework: Collaborative Teachers, Framework: Strong Family-Community Ties October 2018 - June 2019 Assistant principals, princpal November 2018 - May 2019 Assistant principals, principal October 2018 - May 2019 Principal, assistant principals Principal August 2018 - June 2019 iReady interim assessments, OORS reports, review of school committees and school teams minutes iReady interim assessments, OORS reports, review of school committees and school teams minutes iReady interim assessments, OORS reports, review of school committees and school teams minutes iReady interim assessments, OORS reports, review of school committees and school teams minutes How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Tuesday Afternoon Parent Outreach - Tuesday afternoons are reserved for parent outreach. During that time parents are able to speak with teachers via telephone or by making an appointment to meet with the teacher at the school. During that time parents can ask questions about individual concerns and get information pertaining to his/her child. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 65  Pastries With The Principal sessions are held monthly. At that time important information is disseminated regarding instruction and curriculum as well as other topics. Parents get to know the principal on a personal level resulting in greater parent engagement. Sip and Learn Sessions - Monthly parent workshops are held on a variety of topics. The sessions are organized by the school's Renewal Partner. Topics include Handling Stress, Helping Your Child With Homework, Understanding Your Child's IEP. Success Mentors and Family Coach - Renewal staff conduct home visits, meet with parents at the school and speak via telephone daily. The family coach works with all parents in the school, especially parents of newly admitted students. The Success Mentors interact primarily with students and parents of students who are having difficulty in school and with attendance. Parent Newsletters - Monthly Grade Level Parent Newsletters, created by teachers on a grade, will be distributed to provide parents with the information they need to understand what their child is learning and be prepared for upcoming events. In addition, the principal and Renewal Partner will send parent newsletters periodically on a variety of topics as need arises. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The following resources will be leveraged to achieve the goal: School partnership organizations will provide student services   Teacher/Dean, Data Specialist  Partnership consultants and staff coaches will provide professional development for staff  NYCDOE hiring resources    Professional Development sessions will be designed to improve pedagogy  ADVANCE online teacher rating dashboard will monitor staff performance  Per session and per diem will be utilized to provide professional development for teachers. Staff with specific expertise/skills/licensing School Committees will engage all stakeholders in decision making Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February, 2019, as a result of professional learning, 40% of teachers will receive a rating of Effective on the Student Engagement measure (3C) in the ADVANCE rating system. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 66  Advance Reports Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 67  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? To build strong family/community ties, the school strives to bring parents into the school community of learners through the efforts of the parent coordinator, family coach, success mentors, social worker, guidance counselor and consultants, and is closely monitoring parent outreach efforts during the Tuesday afternoon parent engagement time. The more parents feel connected to the school, the ore their children will be motivated to learn, take risks and thrive in their academics. Data Trends As a result of extensive parent outreach, in 2017 - 18 almost 94% of the parent population attended the almost 40 school school events offered. Of those that attended  11 % attended one event  45.7% attended between 2 and 4 events  31.7% % attended between 5 and 9 events  5.4% attended 10 or more events The NYCDOE School Survey 2018-19 RSCEP-R 68  Parent responses on the 2016 - 17 NYC School Survey show the following (Note: 2017-18 School Survey Results are not yet available. However, 100% of parents completed the survey, demonstrating their engagement in the education of their child (ren)):  93% of parents agreed that the principal encourages feedback from parents through regular meetings with parents  94% of parents agreed that the principal is strongly committed to shared decision making  93% of parents agreed that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school  95% of parents agreed that the principal promotes family and community involvement in the school  94% of parents agreed that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit the school  92% of parents agreed that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs  90% of parents agreed that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from the school  94% of parents agreed that the school communicates with them in a language and in a manner they can understand  93% of parents agreed that they feel respected by their child's principal  91% of parents agreed that they trust the principal at her word  92% of parents agreed that the principal is an effective manager who makes the school run smoothly  94% of parents agreed that the principal works hard to build trusting relationships with parents  93% of parents agreed that they feel respected by their child's teachers  92% of parents agreed that the staff works hard to build trusting relationships with parents  91% of parents agreed that teachers and parents think of each others as partners in educating their children School Strengths  PS/MS 123 presents itself as a welcoming school from the moment parents enter. Students’ work is proudly displayed in the front hallway Hall of Fame. Bulletin boards outside the main office speak to the instructional programs and extra curricular activities. Important flyers about community activities, school events, and important notices are openly displayed for parent consumption. School safety agents are a key part of maintaining a calm and supportive environment and as such are required to walk our school during the day on a regular basis including the lunchroom during lunch, so that students know and recognize them as part of the school community.  Tuesday afternoon parent outreach time is effectively used for outreach via phone, emails, teacher-to-parent communiqués, face-to-face meetings. Translation and interpretation services are pre-arranged as needed to encourage participation  Monthly Pastries With the Principal sessions are implemented during which parents can receive information, ask questions and voice concerns. Pastries With the Principal sessions are followed by parent workshops on a variety of topics designed from parents expressed needs.  Regular notices are sent to parents, including translated versions, to keep them up-to-date on all school events.  Monthly grade level parent newsletters are sent by the principal to maintain open parent communication.  Special intergenerational family events (e.g. Family Fun Day, Grandparents Day, Resource Fairs) are implemented together with school partner organizations and attract a large number of family members. Student celebrations are scheduled throughout the year and parents can attend to celebrate with their children.   Weekly Think Tank with the community school director and community based organization school partners have resulted in programs that enhance the regular school day activities.  An open door policy is maintained by the principal and assistant principal so parents know that school staff are here for them, meeting with them if they come to school without a set appointment.  Parents and families receive needed supports and services from the school’s onsite mental health Wellness Center, social worker, family coach, family worker, and guidance counselor.  Annual Events for families (e.g. Winter/Spring Festival, Back to School Family Event, Family Fairs, Student Work Celebrations) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 69   NYC School Survey - to increase the number of parents who complete the NYC School Survey, during parent teacher conferences, parents were invited to the computer lab and assisted in completing the Survey. This resulted in 100% of parents completing the survey (up from 69% in 2016-17 and 39% in 2015-16). Priority Focus Areas Additional family outreach regarding student attendance and lateness (home visits, phone contacts)   Opportunities for parent education via parent workshops at the school  An enhanced school webpage would provide a place for parents to easily access key information  Additional parent engagement activities scheduled throughout the year based on parent expressed needs Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? As a result of renewal, we envision the following:  A service model, that includes both education and social/emotional support, is the basis of parent engagement   activities School staff and partner staff members (guidance counselors, social worker, mental health workers, health workers) are available to provide support services that are needed by families. Special family adult education and parent workshops are provided that address the particular needs of the school's population (e.g. social service needs, ESL, technology) that attract family members.  Parent workshops on a variety of school related topics (e.g. the common core curriculum, testing, student achievement results) are offered throughout the year.  A strong working relationship between the school administration and renewal support staff is developed so that a comprehensive approach to family engagement and service is available.  Translations are available at family functions in several languages so that all families feel welcome.  Parents are included in the design of family services Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? A wealth of activities are implemented during the year to welcome parents into the school, to support research based best practices  In the fall, parents are invited to complete a survey to gather information regarding parent needs, requested learning opportunities, volunteer opportunities etc.  At the fall parent orientation, community partners make presentations about services available for them and their children and volunteer opportunities.  Every parent receives a Parent Handbook (also translated) that provides specific information about school programs and opportunities for them and their children.  Varied inter-generational events (grandparents day, parent breakfast, winter festival, arts festival) are held.  Writing celebrations are held monthly in classrooms.   Monthly grade level parent newsletters are created, as well as a bi-monthly CBO parent newsletter to be Student celebrations (attendance, achievement, awards assembly) are ongoing throughout the year.  distributed. School Safety Agents present a welcoming greeting as soon as parents enter the building. Protocols for parent visits have been established, which are followed by security guards. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 70  Monthly Pastries With the Principal sessions are implemented as explained above.  The school building is a shared spaced between PS/MS 123M and a charter school and space is always a challenge. There is a parent space on the first floor, dedicated for parents who visit the school for activities. This is a space where parents can build networks. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? Grounded in best research-based practices that drive successful parent engagement (i.e. create welcoming environment, establish effective communications, strengthen families' knowledge, engage families in leadership roles, connect families to community resources), Parents are identified primarily by the classroom teacher, classroom teachers, the Family Coach and the Parent Coordinator - all who know parents well. Parents are also identified through the School Leadership Team (SLT) and Parents Association, at Sip and Chat and Pastries With the Principal sessions.. Parents can volunteer with tutoring, as well as supporting English Language Learners (ELLs). Volunteers can also support families by welcoming new parents into the PS 123 school community. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? Teachers make outreach to families during weekly Tuesday afternoon parent outreach time. 100% of parents have received outreach from classroom teachers, guidance counselors, family worker, family coach, social worker and/or mental health workers. Parents are also invited to attend a school curriculum night in the fall plus three scheduled parent/teacher conferences. Monthly grade level newsletters are distributed to all parents. The renewal partner will also be distributing a bi-monthly newsletter for parents that contains pertinent information. What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale Translations of documents and notices Provide parents for whom English Is not their first language with the tools and information they need A Language Access Coordinator identifies translators when a parent is in need of translation services. Daily Attendance Outreach/Home Visits Assistance to parents in improving child’s Telephone translations are also provided by the NYCDOE parent/teacher/translator on a regular basis. Attendance Success Mentors "adopt" a family where children exhibit poor attendance patters - make daily phone calls, visit students in class, conduct home visits to ascertain problems and provide support Assistance to parents in improving child's attendance and engagement in school 2018-19 RSCEP-R 71  Social Services support (social worker, mental health workers), case management, referrals, community based organization partners Provide counseling, case management, Referrals for services families require, High School Choice/College Access workshops, Dental care at the school, English and a New Language classes Family Community Fairs with local agencies and service providers (Green hope Services, Operation Warm, Home Base, Hip Hop for Life, Smile Dental, Mayor’s Office of Domestic Violence) Parents learn about community services that they can receive assistance in 21st Century Leadership Program provides parent workshops on a variety of topics accessing Parents learn about a variety of topics (e/g. including stress management, navigating school resources, understanding your child's IEP) to help them become active in the educational process How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Parents receive monthly grade level newsletters created by teachers on the grade. The newsletters include information about the curriculum, about upcoming student and family events, online resources. Parents also can remain current and active through online resources (i.e. Discovery Ed, MyOnReader, Lightsails). Family partnerships with CBO: Bi-monthly family newsletter, mental health clinic, social worker, family coach, health services (dental services, general health habits) Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? The school building is a shared spaced between PS/MS 123M and a charter school and space is always a challenge. There is a parent space on the first floor, and when a larger space is needed (for a workshop or large meeting) parents are invited to use the Teacher Resource Center, Auditorium, Cafeteria. Our renewal partner staff are housed in offices in the building. What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? Parents are referred to outside agencies that offer adult education in other areas (e.g. GED) through the renewal partnership (i.e. mental health clinic, social worker, Success Mentors).. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? Parents receive ongoing formal student progress information during the school year from 2 progress reports and 4 report cards. In addition, they receive feedback regarding their child’s progress via telephone contact and meetings with 2018-19 RSCEP-R 72  the teacher. Parent Tuesdays are utilized by teachers to conduct outreach (via telephone, notes, personal contact). Grade level parent newsletters provide information and data on an ongoing basis. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, as a result of parent outreach and engagement efforts the number of parents who participate in school activities will be at least 65% Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Leading Indicator: Strong Family-Community Ties 2018-19 RSCEP-R 73  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) ENGAGING FAMILIES Family members will be encouraged to be active participants in their children’s rigorous instructional program. - Work celebrations (Publishing Party, Group Reading) are offered every six weeks during the school year. Parents will have the opportunity to see their children’s work as well as the work of classmates. All Family Members; Students grades K - 8 Leading Indicator: Strong Family-Community Ties Every six weeks during the year Classroom teachers, assistant principals Parent attendance sheets, feedback - Graham Windham’s Family Coach and Success Mentors will work individually with parents regarding student engagement, attendance and lateness. Families of students with poor attendance patterns Leading Indicator: Strong Family-Community Ties September 2018 - June 2019 Community School Director, Principal, Dean OORS Reports, attendance reports Identified families Leading Indicator: Strong Family-Community Ties September 2018 - June 2019 Community School Director, Principa;, Dean OORS Reports, attendance reports All families Leading Indicator: Strong Family-Community Ties November 2018 - May 2019 Community School Director, Wellness Center staff, Principal OORS Reports, attendance reports - Social service supports (mental health, social worker, counseling) and health services (dental health, nutrition) are provided by school and partner staff. Parent Workshops - A variety of parent workshops, suggested at the Community School Forum will be planned (e.g. Explaining Trauma to Children, Stress Management, Conflict Resolution, Mediation) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 74 All Families Leading Indicator: Strong Family-Community Ties September 2018 - May 2019 Community School Director Parent attendance sheets, feedback - Intergenerational events (e.g . Resource Fair, Fall Family Fun Day) will be organized and will include representatives from local service agencies (e.g. Green Hope Services, Home Base, Mayor’s Office of Domestic Violence, Smile Dental) A yearlong calendar describing events is distributed to all families. - Parenting Journey - a 12 week certificate program where parents meet to discuss, develop and support each other as parents and role models. Holiday Kits are provided for needy families. Kits include food and other necessary items to help make a positive holiday experience. PARENT COMMUNICATION Self-Identified parents Leading Indicator: Strong Family-Community Ties - Middle School Student Council provides a voice for students in school matters Identified students grade 5 - 8 Leading Indicator: Strong Family-Community Ties Community School Director Assistant Principal October 2018 - December 2018 Monthly, October 2018 - June 2019 Parent attendance sheets, feedback Student Council Minutes Parent engagement data Identified families Leading Indicator: Strong Family-Community Ties December 2018 Community Schools Director, renewal staff Leading Indicator: Strong Family-Community Ties September 2018 - June 2019 Classroom teachers on a grade, principal, community school director Parent engagement data All Families - Monthly parent newsletters are created on each grade so that parents are informed about current and upcoming activities that their student will be participating in, as well as upcoming events to prepare for. Monthly parent newsletters are also prepared by Renewal Staff to provide information to parents about upcoming events and continued outreach to parents - MyOn Reader; Lightsails, Discovery Education - Students passwords enable them to work at home with Families of parents of students in K - 8. Leading Indicator: Strong Family-Community Ties September 2018 - June 2019 Assistant principals, technology coach Logon/usage data 2018-19 RSCEP-R 75  online resources in reading, social studies and science. Parents can engage with their children in reading together and on social studies and science projects.. - On Parent/Teacher conference days, the Parent Coordinator, and the renewal partner Family Coach, are available to meet with parents. CBO partners are also available to engage parents regarding available services. - A Parent Handbook is distributed to all parents at the beginning of the school year. It is a helpful, parent-friendly guide to PS 123. The Handbook is translated into Spanish and French. - Parent Translations - The school provides translations of telephone messages and important documents and has bilingual staff on hand at parent meetings. All Families Leading Indicator: Strong Family-Community Ties September, January, March, May Community School Director, Principal Parent attendance sheets, feedback All Families Leading Indicator: Strong Family-Community Ties September 2018 Principal Parent engagement data All Families Leading Indicator: Strong Family-Community Ties September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, bilingual staff members Parent engagement data Monthly, October 2018 - May 2019 Regularly scheduled October 2018 - May 2019 Principal, Community School Director Community School Director, Principal Parent attendance sheets, feedback Parent attendance sheets, feedback Families of participating students Leading Indicator: Strong Family-Community Ties Winter 2018 and Spring 2019 Principal, assistant principals Parent attendance sheets, feedback 2018-19 RSCEP-R 76 Pastries With the Principal sessions (described above) are held monthly.. All interested families Leading Indicator: Strong Family-Community Ties All Families Leading Indicator: Strong Family-Community Ties FAMILY EVENTS - Special school events (e.g. Grandparents Day, Family Fun Day, celebrations of student work such as publishing parties) will continue to be offered. Special activities will be planned with Renewal Partner staff, parents, parent coordinator and teachers so as to attract parents and augment attendance. - Special performances and celebrations (e.g. National Dance Institute student performances, Ogilvy  Student Video presentations, art exhibits, reading celebrations)) will be offered for parents. The performances will be scheduled during the day and in the evening to accommodate parent schedules. RENEWAL PARTNER - Graham Windham offers opportunities for families to engage in special events throughout the year, and is an integral partner in the school, working closely with school administration, parents, teachers and the PS/MS 123 parent coordinator. - Support services for families who need specialized support (eg. coping with housing, immigration and domestic violence) are provided by the social worker as well as staff from the mental health wellness center. - An Attendance Outreach/Improvement program is provided by a cadre of Success Mentors who "adopt" a student with chronic absenteeism and provide the supports and outreach the student needs to come to school regularly. The Success Mentors also make home visits to meet students' parents and offer assistance to the family members. - Family Fairs are offered during the year. At these fairs, representatives from local service agencies are on hand to present support opportunities to parents (e.g. Operation Warm, Home Base, Smile Dental, Green Hope Services, Identified Families Leading Indicator: Strong Family-Community Ties September 2018 - June 2019 Community Schools Director OORS Reports, attendance reports Leading Indicator: Strong Family-Community Ties September 2018 - June 2019 Community Schools Director, Principal Attendance Reports Families of students with poor attendance patterns All Families Leading Indicator: Strong Family-Community Ties September 2018, Winter 2018, Spring 2019 Community Schools Director, Beacon Director, YMCA Director Parent attendance sheets, feedback 2018-19 RSCEP-R 77  Mayor's Office of Domestic Violence) PARENT LEARNING - Curriculum Night and Fun Night offered for parents early in the school year so parents can learn about Common Core Learning Standards - Sip and Chat Classes - to learn about issues of interest to parents (e.g. housing, nutrition, fitness, yoga) Computers for Parents-Parents have access to computers in the school and will receive computer training All Families Leading Indicator: Strong Family-Community Ties September 2018 Principal, assistant principals Parent attendance sheets, feedback Interested Parents Leading Indicator: Strong Family-Community Ties Monthly, October 2018 - May 2019 Community Schools Director Parent attendance sheets, feedback All parents Leading Indicator: Strong Family-Community Ties September 2018 - June 2019 Computer lab teacher, technology coach Parent logs Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator, Renewal Partner staff, district office staff, school partner staff, Tuesday parent engagement time, special parent events, and parent workshops, renewal funding for parent engagement activities. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, as a result of parent outreach and engagement efforts the number of parents who participate in school activities will be at least 40%. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent activities attendance sheets. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 78  Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 79  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a growth rate of 20% over 2018 data in the number of students who score 60% correct in two core standards on the Pen and Pencil Ready Assessment Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. All students participate in the mandatory Renewal ELT. The program continues after the regular school day and dismissal from school takes place after the ELT for all students. Parents and students are informed about the extended school hours at the beginning of the school year, and understand that no student will be dismissed before the ELT hours. No students will be excused from attending the ELT, which is a regular part, and extension o,f the school day. Attendance is taken two times during the day - once in the morning and again in the afternoon. A Saturday Academy program is offered for students in grades 3 – 8. The program focuses on developing students’ skills needed for demonstrating high achievement on standardized tests in ELA and math. A Saturday ENL (English as a New Language) program is offered for ELLs. (it runs concurrently with the Saturday Academy and serves students in grades 2 - 8. School partners (YMCA, Graham Windham Beacon) provide additional extended day/extended week services that wrap around the mandated ELT program after school during the week and on weekends, school holidays, and during the summer. As suggested at the Community Education School Forum, the Beacon and YMCA will collaborate with the school on including a strategy for including homework time during after school programs. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 80  Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? ELT activities for all students, provided in collaboration with Graham Windham, YMCA, and Beacon, reflect a school focus on data based instruction, that utilizes active, project based, and differentiated learning experiences. Students engage in rigorous learning through re-teaching, individual tutoring, project-based learning, and group learning experiences. Consistency between the ELT and activities during the regular school day is achieved by having classroom teachers teaching their own students during the ELT, and by PS 123M staff and community partner staff using the same curricular materials. The PS/MS 123M and Graham Windham ELT program is a true extension of the regular school day rather than just a stand-alone, “add-on” program. In following the guidance for use of the expanded learning time provided by the NYCDOE, the ELT renewal program of service is offered to every student immediately following the end of the regularly scheduled school day. Services are provided through close coordination between school staff and CBO school-based staff. The ELT offers a range of acceptable supplemental academic classes/activities from Tuesday through Thursday, and enrichment on Friday. Organization of the ELT/Range of Services  On Tuesdays, the ELT focuses on iReady online and paper and pencil activities in both ELA and Math.  On Wednesdays, the ELT focuses on English Language Arts (ELA) activities - reading, writing, speaking, using the Teachers' College Writing Project, and Common Core aligned materials.  On Thursdays, the ELT focuses on Mathematics, using manipulatives, and higher order thinking problems.  On Fridays, the ELT is designed around enrichment activities based on teachers' interests and talents. At the end of the year, students present their final products/performances and the ELT Expo. A club program is 2018-19 RSCEP-R 81 offered to middle school students. Club activities include a STEP dance program and computer coding program. In addition, the non-renewal hour ELT programs provided by the YMCA, the Graham Windham Beacon Program run from Monday through Friday, Saturdays to supplement the mandated ELT renewal hour.  Range of Activities – The ELT program provides tutoring, academic skill development, homework help, student support services, recreation, sports and athletics, enrichment, middle school clubs, and test sophistication strategies. A Saturday program run by Beacon provides inter-generational learning experiences, activities and projects Address Learning Needs – Since Graham Windham will become an integral part of the school; activities and services offered address students’ current learning and social/emotional needs. Instructional materials utilized are co-selected by the school and Graham Windham. New Content Areas/Opportunities – We anticipate a wide range of new activities will be provided such as Robotics, technology, sports teams, field trips, and partnerships with local community based agencies for real-life learning Professional Development – For the Graham Windham programs, professional development is provided Graham Windham resources and the school. When appropriate and feasible extended day staff will be invited to attend PS/MS 123M professional development workshops. Family Outreach – to let parents know how their children are doing, is provided by - Graham Windham staff as part of their regular family outreach program - PS/MS 123M teachers as part of the regular designated Tuesday afternoon parent outreach time - PS/MS 123M staff who are providing services - Regular school progress reports, report cards and parent teacher conferences include information relevant to the renewal hour ELT. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. 1. The principal, assistant principals and renewal school director oversee the ELT program. 2. Existing school partners that provide after school programs (i.e. Graham Windham Beacon Program, YMCA) provide services during the ELT program to small groups of students under the supervision of licensed teachers. 3. Academic improvement is assessed through analysis of school administered IReady interim assessments. Social emotional development will be assessed through an analysis of OORS Incident reports and attendance reports. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 82  The program begins on the first day of school, and runs through the last day of school. The program runs for 1:15 on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays. Implementation of non-mandated programs (i.e. Beacon Program, YMCA Program) begin shortly after the beginning of the school year, with registration beginning in September 2018 and remaining ongoing throughout the school year. Extended week/holiday programs run by CBO partners run from October – June. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. ELT program is supported by staff from partner organizations (i.e. Beacon, Graham Windham, YMCA) through outside funding sources. School staff funded through tax levy grant allocations teach ELT classes. Funds for supplies and materials are utilized to provide instructional materials for the ELT. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X SIG Grant P/F Set-aside School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks By February 2019, there will be an increase of 10% over the previous year in the number of students who score 50% correct in two core standards on the Pen and Pencil Ready Assessment. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Ready Class Reports Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 83  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, implementation of the Community School Model will result in an increase of 5 percentage points in positive responses on the Trust section of the New York City School Survey. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Leading Indicators: Improved Attendance, Strong Family-Community Attendance Supportive Environment Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Mayor’s Office of Domestic Violence Family, community, students and teachers YMCA HomeBase Students grades K - 2 Family and community Greenhope Services for Women Parents and community Graham Windham ACS Preventive Services Family, community, parents Graham Windham Parenting Journey Adults, community, parents Workshops on parenting, healthy relationships, trauma and abuse identification Instructional and social-emotional support during ELT Homelessness prevention and other support services related to housing Substance abuse workshops and services for women in an outpatient clinic Economic support counseling, case planning and referrals to help families maintain self-sufficiency Parenting workshops on self-care, decision making and empowerment 2018-19 RSCEP-R 84  2. 3. 4. Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. Graham Windham continues to be the Renewal School Partner for PS/MS 123M. Graham Windham also operates a ACS Preventative Service program and a Department of Youth and Community Development funded Beacon Program at PS/MS 123M. maintaining strong community ties with families and other community based organizations, Graham-Windham continues to provide service to the community of M123 having operated Beacon, Cornerstone and mental health programs for 22 years. Community School Director – The Community School Director has become an integral part of the PS/MS 123 M Community. The Director will continue to be responsible for overseeing the provision of supportive services at the school and ensuring extensive and meaningful community and parental engagement. The Director will be a highly visible presence in the school and community and will develop favorable rapport with parents, CBO leaders, members of the local Community Board and business owners while functioning as a catalyst, connector and trusted colleague to many. The Director will contribute to the decision making process in the following areas: · Increased parent engagement · Coordination and participation in Expanded Learning Time activities, tied to social emotional support and math and literacy enrichment. · Increased utilization for mental health services and improved mental health, and the degree to which students achieve progress toward identified goals · Increased attendance of chronically absent students Personalized Student Needs 2018-19 RSCEP-R 85  The Community Engagement Team, School Leadership Team and Student Support Group will continue to be instrumental in the design of community schools activities, services and decision making. Graham Windham onsite staff (community school director, family coach, social worker and mental health clinician) will continue to play an active role in the school community by gaining knowledge of student and family needs and providing ongoing communication with team members to implement measurable and realistic intervention plans. Expanded Learning Time – Graham Windham will partner with the school to coordinate supervision, enrichment and support during the Renewal hour. In addition, the Graham Beacon Center will continue to provide additional learning time programming and opportunities for students through the after school program. The Beacon program will work in conjunction with the school to provide homework help, academic clubs, civic engagement, life skills and summer camp opportunities. A more detailed description of the ELT was provided in Section 6. Mental health programming - Graham Windham will continue to provide school based mental health services and support through the onsite Wellnes Center. A licensed mental health clinician will provide mental health counseling, crisis intervention, and also facilitate workshops for parents, teachers and students. Mental health services may be obtained by referral from school administrators, members of the Student Support Group, teachers, and CBO staff working with students during ELT and throughout the school day, family coach or walk- in/self-referral. The quality of mental health services throughout the year will be assessed by the school community by completing feedback surveys that assess program quality, access to surveys and recommendations for future. Restorative Circles and Youth Coping Skills group will be facilitated by Graham social worker throughout the school day to teach coping skills and de-escalation strategies to students. Small groups will engage in 6 week cycle sessions on trigger identification, stress management, etc. Parent Engagement – To ensure increased parent engagement at the school, Graham Windham will continue to offer opportunities for families to engage in special events throughout the year, and will be an integral partner in the school, working closely with school administration, parents, teachers and the PS/MS 123 parent coordinator. The exact nature of the parent activities will be collaboratively determined by members of the CST based on needs obtained from the prior year Community Engagement forum and feedback forms and surveys. Engagement activities include: monthly newsletters, mental health/health workshops, parenting workshops, movie nights, ABE/ESL/computer literacy programming, holiday/cultural celebrations. Attendance Improvement - Graham Windham will work closely with the school to engage parents of students with chronic absenteeism by adopting a Success mentoring model, including daily student check-ins on-site, phone calls to parents when students are absent, home visits, and in-school conferences. Graham Windham will refer parents to support services, if necessary to increase opportunity for students and families. Graham Windham will also facilitate the Rock-it-Bucks Attendance Incentive program. Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight 2018-19 RSCEP-R 86  Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Program oversight will be provided through several structures:  Weekly Think Tank Meetings- Administrative meetings will be held to quality monitor the schools progress in   the areas of attendance, ELT, parent engagement, mental health, school community needs, etc. These meetings will include the school Principal, Assistant Principal, Graham Windham Vice President of Family and Community Services, the Community School Director. On occasion, Graham Windham and school staff will be present to share experiences, give feedback and provide suggestions to improvement of services. Student Success Attendance Meetings- Weekly meetings to discuss individualized student plans and progress as it relates to identified chronically absent students. Graham Windham- family coach, social worker and support staff, in conjunction with school administrators and the school attendance teacher and pupil personnel will discuss individual and school wide attendance progress, create family support and formulate action plans. These meeting include DOE Attendance Teacher, Pupil Personnel, Principal, Assistant Principal, Community School Director, Graham Family Coach, Graham Social Worker, . Student Support Groups- Weekly, Graham Windham staff and school support staff will meet to discuss students identified by administrators, teachers, school support staff and CBO staff in needing social emotional, academic or family support. School and partner staff complete a brief intervention form, supported with anecdotes and submitted to the school guidance counselor. Students identified are discussed in- depth in this team meeting from various lenses including academic, social-emotional, etc. Attendees include the school principal and assistant principal, Graham Windham Community School Director, family coach, social worker, Success Mentor, guidance counselor, Graham Windham Preventive Director, ESL teacher, school psychologist.  Data strategies used to ensure the appropriate interventions are provided include: use and tracking of OORS reports, I logs and other reports from ATS, Data Sorter Heat Map and Student Sorter supports and interventions, use of prior minutes and agenda to address follow up progress and status. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. The following resources are needed to build a successful partnership that will meet the needs of the PS/MS 123M community:  On-site mental health worker(s) who can provide direct services, and/or referral services from other agencies on a case management basis. The mental health worker(s) will also oversee delivery of services, measure student and family progress, and make mid-year adjustments as indicated.  Tutors, teachers, instructors who will provide renewal hour learning opportunities such as homework help, tutoring, book clubs, performing arts, public speaking, robotics., as well as during-the-day academic intervention services for targeted students  A Family Coach who is instrumental in designing and implementing parent engagement opportunities. The family worker will need to work closely not only with Graham Windham mental health staff, but with school staff on a continuing basis.  Graham Windham staff, working closely with the PS/MS 123M Parent Coordinator to plan and implement family events (e.g. performances, field days, health fairs). 2018-19 RSCEP-R 87   The Graham Windham Social Worker will work with school guidance counselors to provide student and family supports. Social work and mental health interns, working under the supervision of the licensed social worker, will provide crisis intervention, class push-ins and workshops for teachers and students  Translation services provided by bilingual Graham Windham and school staff  The principal and assistant principal will organize and guide the collaboration between partner and school support staff as follows. o o - Continued collaboration between Graham Windham and school administrates to quality monitor program progress, - Continued collaborations between Graham Windham and the PS/MS 123M parent coordinator, parent association, and family coach to increase family engagement and effectively execute family events. Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Planning is ongoing via Weekly Think Tank meetings attended by school administration, Graham Windham Renewal Director and Graham Windham administration. Services run from July 2018 (summer camp program) through June 2019 school year services. Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 88  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Student performance on NYS 2018 standardized test in ELA at levels 1 and 2. Students at risk of not scoring at level 3 and 4 on NYS standardized test in ELA as determined by results on interim assessments. For students in K – 2 we use baseline reading data and MOSL scores. Student performance on NYS 2018 standardized test in Math at levels 1 and 2. Students at risk of not scoring at level 3 and 4 on NYS standardized test in Math as determined by teacher recommendation. Students in grades 4 and 8 who do not score at grade level on NYS Science test. Students at risk of not scoring at grade level on NYS Science test as determined by Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group; one-on-one; tutoring; push-in/pull-out; use of online scaffolded student reading programs When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day; during ELT school and partners extended day program; on Saturdays during the Saturday Academy (grades 3 – 8); ELL Title III program after school Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Workshop model teaching, differentiated tasks and assignments, conferencing, AIS remediation, guided reading groups, skills and strategies linked to CCLS curriculum, Reading Rescue and Fundationsfor students in the lower grades, .iReadyduring ELT Workshop model teaching, differentiated tasks and assignments, conferencing, AIS remediation Small group; one-on-one; tutoring; push-in/pull-out; use of online student scaffolded math programs During the school day; during extended day program; on Saturdays during the Saturday Academy; ELL Title III after school Differentiated assignments/tasks, leveled materials Small group; one-on-one; tutoring; individualizing, close reading strategies in science; differentiation During the school day, after school 2018-19 RSCEP-R 89 Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) classroom teacher recommendation. Students at risk of not scoring at grade level on NYS ELA test as determined by classroom teacher recommendation, with focus skill sets needed for social studies. Students in grades K - 8 who demonstrate disciplinary and/or social emotional needs and issues. Small group; one-on-one; tutoring During the school day Small group; one-on-one During the school day, after-school partnership programs Differentiated assignments/tasks, leveled materials; focus on instructional shifts; using non-fiction texts, citing evidence; connecting EL strands to social studies Counseling, behavior management, positive behavior program, Leadership Program partnership (mentoring), Graham Windham partnership; behavior intervention support 2018-19 RSCEP-R 90  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in temporary housing are provided with a variety of services There are approximately 179 Students in Temporary Housing attending PS/MS 123M, in shelters and domestic violence shelters. These students represent approximately 20% of the student enrollment.  They receive school supplies and uniforms at no cost.  Students in grades 3 - 8 receive Student Planners , a book designed to assist them in keeping important information and homework assignments organized. The Planner is also a resource of information regarding the school calendar (holidays, testing days etc.), writing, social studies and mathematics guidance. The planner has been redesigned for 2018-19. Students and families receive family support, including services from the mental health facility and social worker in the school (counseling and case management).   The Student Support Group (SSG) identifies students who are having difficulty managing in school and develops a plan of action for assisting these students.  The renewal family coach and family worker provide support and assistance as required. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS not applicable 2018-19 RSCEP-R 91  1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. not applicable 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. not applicable 2018-19 RSCEP-R 92  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment ● The NYCDOE teacher processes for identifying teachers will be utilized. ● As new positions become available applicants will go through a rigorous vetting process that will include model lesson delivery, interview, and reference check. ● If positions open during the school year, candidates will be required to demonstrate a lesson that is hands-on and is grounded in Danielson and Common Core Learning Standards. Retention Every effort will be made to retain successful teachers. Efforts include ● Providing teachers with sufficient and engaging instructional materials ● Providing professional development training that meets the teacher’s needs, and providing opportunities for effective teachers to provide professional development for their colleagues. ● Providing opportunities for teacher leadership (e.g. serving on school committees, recognition for excellence in teaching) and decision making ● New teachers will be assigned a senior staff member teaching in the same program/grade level / content area. This “buddy teacher” will serve as a mentor and facilitator to guide and support the new teacher. Assignments ● Whenever possible teachers will be assigned at the grade level where they have the most experience, have been successful, and feel the most comfortable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 93  ● If a teacher assignment does not work out, the teacher can be moved to another assignment at the end of the school year. ● Where indicated, cluster teachers will be assigned according to their area of expertise (e.g. computer lab, visual arts) Support ● Use of the Danielson Framework for Teaching as a foundation for identifying effective teaching practices used during both short frequent informal observations and for formal observations to ensure teachers meet expectations of teaching and are suitable placed in content area/grade level to maximize teacher’s impact on student learning ● Consultant coaches and grade-level collaborative team work will provide additional support to those new to the profession, and to all others by modeling lessons, participating in discussions, offering opportunities for de-briefs after classroom inter-visitations, and providing additional training based on observed needs in order that teachers feel supported as they learn to implement best practices ● CBO partners (Renewal Partner, Beacon) attend weekly Pupil Personnel Team meetings as an intervention support. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers ● Provide opportunities for teachers to attend Citywide professional development to support implementation of new CCLS curricula and other instructional programs (e.g. Wilson Reading Program, Teachers College Writing Workshop) ● Teachers will engage in weekly Grade Level Team Meetings for planning and coaching around developing rigorous curriculum, including adjustments to meet the needs of SWD and ELLS. Common protocols and tools will be utilized to guide professional learning and developing “next steps”. Grade level team meetings will be facilitated either by teacher leader or coaching specialist. ● Provide grade level common prep periods so that teachers have ample time for collaboration, examining student work for evidence of learning, and to identify learning gaps against the demands of the Common Core standards. ● Provide school based opportunities to attend professional development workshops (e.g. intervisitations). ● Coaches and Assistant Principals facilitate Grade Level Team Meetings and Monday and Tuesday professional learning sessions as teachers examine student work, use student achievement data for instructional planning, create curriculum maps/plans and pacing calendars, etc. ● In-class and small group coaching in reading/writing, mathematics, integration of technology ● Involve staff in setting personal goals allowing them to reflect on their work to identify their areas for growth relative to effective teaching practices as identified by Danielson ● Teachers meet three times per year with the principal and AP for a data conference at which they discuss differentiation strategies 2018-19 RSCEP-R 94   Subject area teachers will be supported by school based coaches across the curriculum areas as well as by lead teachers with expertise in subject areas as well as strategies for English Language Learners (ELLs) and students with disabilities (SWD). Support Personnel  Guidance and other support staff (e.g. speech, physical and occupational therapy staff ) attend schoolwide professional development activities across the curriculum areas to develop a full understanding of school foci as well as the use of data to drive instruction. Support personnel will attend DOE centrally offered trainings and opportunities for networking with providers across the city.  Principal  The principal will participate in intensive training in the Data Wise protocol for utilizing data to drive discussions, initiatives and instruction. Administration will share their learnings with teachers and other school staff during professional development times, at grade level team meetings, and at Instructional Cabinet meetings. In addition, consultant coaches will work weekly with school administration in a variety of areas such as literacy development, use of data, refining effective school processes and protocols.  Assistant Principal ● Weekly meetings with the principal to develop effective supervisory skills, deepen understanding of instructional strategies, scheduling, program design and management, etc. ● Provide a Mentor/Coach to help with development of supervisory and instructional skills. ● Opportunities to attend citywide and district provided professional development (e.g. PBIS training) ● Principal and APs conduct walkthroughs together to ensure ADVANCE calibration Paraprofessionals ● Provide opportunities for paraprofessionals to learn alongside classroom teachers (e.g. attending Grade Level Team Meetings, school-based workshops, working with ELA, Math and Technology coaches) ● Opportunities to attend citywide and/or district provided professional development sessions Parent Coordinator The PS/MS 123M Parent Coordinator is provided with opportunities to attend all District and Citywide parent training sessions. When appropriate, parents are invited to attend as well. Additionally, consultants, who are providing parent workshops will plan and review workshop content with parent coordinator, will work alongside parent coordinator and model effective workshop techniques so that the coordinator can provide parent workshops on her own when the consultant is not with her. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources 2018-19 RSCEP-R 95  Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). To assist in transition of students from preschool to early childhood programs, a variety of activities are implemented including the following:  In the spring, parents are invited to attend Open Houses to meet the administration, and tour classrooms. They learn about the school policies, practices, expectations, instructional programs and student support services.  Orientations are also held in the fall where they again participate in sessions to learn about PS 123 policies and practices, the instructional program, student and parent support services and school expectations.  As part of NYCDOE practice, Pre-Kindergarten students begin the school year with a staggered schedule to  introduce them to the school. Information for students who had previously attended CBO early childhood programs is shared by PS 123 with the CBO the students can learn about the school before they arrive. Information about individual student needs, challenges and strengths is shared with the school by the CBO the school can prepare appropriately to meet the needs of each child, including those children who have been identified as needing early intervention.  Communication between early childhood providers in the school and preschool providers is ongoing to ensure seamless integration of students and alignment of curriculum. When feasible, pre school providers can attend school based professional development. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● Teachers meet during grade level team conferences and instructional cabinet to plan formative assessment measures relative to the Common Core Standards and Learning Targets. Teachers and administration use multiple data sources to assess students such as Fountas & Pinnell, Accelerated Reader, iReady and Interim Assessments (Math Benchmarks, Writing Benchmarks, End of Unit Tests). Assessment data is then used to plan and implement differentiated and targeted instruction throughout the day and during after school and Extended Learning Time. ● Teachers are trained and supported in the use of assessments and analysis of assessment data (including student work data) by school based coaches, by the assistant principals and by the principal during grade level team meetings, on Monday afternoon professional learning sessions, and during one-on-one coaching sessions. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 96  ● One-on-one meetings with school supervisors to understand individual student’s assessment results, and to discuss and develop strategies to address deficiencies are held.  School Committees - Teachers have opportunity to learn about and provide input regarding assessments through school committees (e.g. Vertical Instructional Cabinet, Core Team Committee) as part of the decision making process. The Instructional Cabinet provides input in making decisions regarding assessment instruments and schedule of assessments based on input from colleagues across grades and subject areas. Members of Cabinet represent constituencies across grades and subject areas. The Core Team is made up of Lead Teachers, coaches and administration. Like the Instructional Cabinet, the Core Team participates in making school decisions as well as designing and implementing instructional initiatives, parent events etc. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal $ 322,997 Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds $ 119,032 Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal $ 83,174 $ 13,518 n/a $ 4,063,215 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 1Explanation/Background: x x x x n/a x Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6,7,8,9,10 n/a 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6,7,8,9,10 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6,7,8,9,10 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6,7,8,9,10 n/a 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6,7,8,9,10 2018-19 RSCEP-R 97  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 98   Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 99  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS/Ms123 - The Mahalia Jackson School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS/MS 123M will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 100  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Act (ESSA); 2018-19 RSCEP-R 101  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference/Community Forum ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; provide translators at family events and translations of notices to parents ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events (e.g. grandparents day, family fun day, fathers/children day); ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/MS 123M, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 RSCEP-R 102  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement on Progress Reports will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 103  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Utilizing Tuesday afternoon parent outreach time to make personal contact with parents I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 RSCEP-R 104  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 105  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 106  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 RSCEP-R 107  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Saturday Academy Rationale: PS/MS 123 currently has 84 ELLs from kindergarten through eighth grade. These ELLs range in proficiency from entering to commanding with 72 students at the transitioning and expanding levels of proficiency, including some newcomers who are served in the After-school program.. The ELL Saturday Academy for English Language Learners Program focuses on students in grades K-8 that are at the Transitioning and Expanding proficiency levels. The rationale is to provide students academic and social interventions. The goals of the ELL Saturday academy are designed to assist these students to: achieve academic proficiency in all dimensions of the English language, attain highly proficient academic achievement in all of the four language modalities (listening, speaking, reading, writing), and develop a positive- self-image by acknowledging the linguistic and cultural diversity of our community. More specifically, students need scaffolded support with writing skills that allow them to show more progress in the writing modality; based on the 2018 NYSESLAT results. Students range from beginning to developing and also long time ELLs. Additionally, there are a large number of newcomers in the middle school who require additional supports to help them learn English. These students need assistance in developing academic English Language acquisition skills as quickly as possible. The emphasis of the program will be on reading and writing based on the ELL Data Analysis Tool's aggregated data (which includes the 2018 NYSESLAT scores) and literacy interim assessments . The program will focus on assisting students in the four modalities (listening, reading, writing and speaking) through teacher made activities and assessments and the Imagine learning online platform. Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: Subgroup Transitioning and Expanding Levels Total # of students 77 Grades K-8 Classes K-1 3 students (Transitioning only) 2-3 10 students (Transitioning only) 3-4 12 students (Expanding G3 and TR & EX grade 4) 5-6 22 students 7-8 17 students # of teachers 2018-19 RSCEP-R 108  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 5 Schedule and duration: Saturday Academy The program will run on Saturdays from January to May for a total of 8-9 sessions, ELL students will gain additional learning time in English Language Arts, Mathematics, and Culturally Responsive instruction. Class sizes will not exceed 15 students at each grade band (we will open another section if students consent to coming). This will provide teachers the ability to deliver more strategic, small group instruction to meet each student’s individual needs. The after school program runs from Tuesday through Friday from September - June. Time Activity 9:00am – 10:00 am ELA Instruction 10:00 am- 10:30 am Imagine Learning 10:30 am-11: 30 am Math Instruction 11:30 am-12:00 pm Language Instruction 12:00pm Dismissal Program components ELA During English Language Arts instruction, students will receive language support for all modalities of the English language, with a heavy focus on writing instruction as per the NYSESLAT data. Teachers will focus on delivering standards based lessons. Students will also receive targeted instruction at their language level. Teachers will use the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP) for English proficiency-level planning to provide a collaborative learning environment that provides students the opportunities to practice strategies like Think-Pair- Share, Vocalized Reading, Reader’s Theater, access to a vocabulary and language toolkit, Reciprocal Reading, using Advanced Graphic Organizers like Thinking Maps® and other researched-based ELL teaching strategies. Entering, Emerging and Transitioning ELLs will be utilizing Imagine Leaning as a online targeted support to develop both ELA and Math skills. Math During Mathematics instruction, students will experience a blended-learning classroom environment. The teacher will conduct small group instruction with one group (no more than 8 students) for thirty minutes, while the other group of students (no more than 8) will receive thirty minutes of the online program, ST Math (a new school initiative). During the teacher guided small group instruction, the teacher will use the SIOP planning guide to plan for mathematical language instruction. The teacher will focus on the deconstruction of mathematical word problems that present students difficulty and teach both “brick and mortar” words. Strategic focus will be placed on keywords in mathematical language and understanding its structure. Teachers will identify areas of support by the use of our school’s Data Wise Initiative, through the Grade Team’s creation of grade level “Data Stories”. Project Based Learning During Project Based Learning time, teachers will engage in Culturally Responsive teaching. Teachers will provide students access to the idea of learning within the context of a variety of cultures around the world through student-centered instruction. Students will be provided the 2018-19 RSCEP-R 109  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information choice of picking cultures to research and learn more about. They will study a a variety of cultures, society, art, music, education and more. Students will also study aspects of the American culture and language. For example, idioms and idioms play a specific role in communication. Culminating Project As a culminating project, all ELLs that are serviced within our school community (not just those who attend the ELL Saturday Academy) will be given the opportunity to attend an end of the year trip to Ellis Island and the Statue of Liberty. Students will learn about how immigrants came to America and make connections to their own lives and family. Throughout the program students will also benefit from possible neighborhood trips, museum trips, and other trips that will assist in their English Language Development. T3 funds (OTPS maximum 20%) will be used ONLY for costs pertaining to the ELLS. Language of instruction: The language of instruction will be English. # and types of certified teachers: There will be one certified program coordinator - Ms. Jeffries who is NYS certified and NYCDOE licensed TESOL teacher. Certified ENL and general education teachers, some of whom hold dual certification in common branches and TESOL will provide service as well. Ms. Mikelaj 6th grade teacher TESOL and CB license servicing 6th graders Ms. Ann-Marie Clarke 5th grade teacher Tesol and CB license Ms. Galeano Full-time ENL certified teacher serving students in 5-8 Ms. Schlesier: Full-time ENL certified teacher serving students in grade K-4 Types of materials: A variety of materials will be ordered that meet the needs of the target population. Materials will include trade books, dictionaries, leveled library books, materials for teacher made activities, etc. Vendors will include Book Source, Scholastic, Discovery Channel, and Pearson. In addition, we plan to use components of i-Ready instructional data to provide strategic academic instruction to students. Instruction will be individualized through the use of online learning programs (e.g. Discovery Education, Mathletics,Imagine Learning, MyOn Reader) . Special instructional materials (e.g. Orton Gillingham, Fundations) and expanded classroom libraries, Classrooms will be equipped with computers, iPads and laptops to be utilized for the program. Specific titles/materials will be determined according to student need and will be ordered during the year as needs emerge. This program will also make use of materials that the school already owns including a Promethean Board, desktop computers and iPads. In each classroom students should have access to iPads, laptops and desktop computers. To ensure that all students are continually engaged in developing their language skills and to differentiate for different proficiency levels. After School Program Rationale: PS/MS 123 currently has 84 ELLs from kindergarten through eighth grade. These ELLs range in proficiency from entering to commanding. The after-school program will support students at the newcomer and expanding levels. The after-school program focuses on students who come from a variety of language backgrounds. The rationale is to provide students academic and social interventions through the listening and speaking modalities. The goals of the after school program are designed to assist these students to: achieve academic proficiency in the listening and writing areas of the English language, and develop a positive- self-image by acknowledging the linguistic and cultural diversity of our community. Based on the 2018 NYSESLAT results. Students range from beginning to developing and also long time 2018-19 RSCEP-R 110  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information ELLs. Student will be introduced to different multimedia resources and activities to build their repertoire of content knowledge and then linguistically apply it in their speaking. The emphasis of the program will be on listening and writing based on the ELL Data Analysis Tool's aggregated data (which includes the 2018 NYSESLAT scores) and literacy interim assessments . There are 10 students who have been serviced for 5-6 years (13%) will also be part of the after school program to assist them in reaching the commanding level. Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: Subgroup Newcomer & Expanding Levels Total # of students 77 Grades K-8 Classes K-2 4 students 3-4 10 students 5-6 8 students 7-8 9 students Newcomers (Y0-Y2) 30 students in total throughout # of teachers 3 Schedule and duration: The program will run after school from September to June daily on Tuesdays through Fridays from 2:20 pm-3:35 pm. Class sizes will not exceed 15 students at each grade band. This will provide teachers the ability to deliver more strategic, small group instruction to meet each student’s individual needs. Program components ELA During English Language Arts instruction, students will receive language support for all modalities of the English language, with a heavy focus on writing instruction as per the NYSESLAT data. Teachers will focus on delivering standards based lessons. Students will also receive targeted instruction at their language level. Teachers will use the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP) for English proficiency-level planning to provide a collaborative learning environment that provides students the opportunities to practice strategies like Think-Pair- Share, Vocalized Reading, Reader’s Theater, access to a vocabulary and language toolkit, Reciprocal Reading, using Advanced Graphic Organizers like Thinking Maps® and other researched-based ELL teaching strategies. Teachers will go to professional development around using theater to deliver ELA instruction. Language Development During Language Development time teachers will provide students access to the language structures in the English language. Teachers will plan and engage students in a variety of forms of Figurative Language. For example, idioms and how they play a specific role in communication. This will provide students access to the nuances in the English language and continue to strengthen their Basic Interpersonal Communicative Skills. Culturally Responsive Teaching 2018-19 RSCEP-R 111  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information During the Culturally Responsive instruction, teachers will provide students access to multicultural libraries and texts that students can relate to. Students will complete tasks that are linguistically sensitive to their native language. Students will use bilingual glossaries to build their vocabulary and understanding of the English language. They will study a a variety of cultures, society, art, music, education and more. Students will also study aspects of the American culture and language. Language of instruction: The language of instruction will be English. # and types of certified teachers: There will be one certified program coordinator - Ms. Velazquez Ms. Jeffries who is NYS certified and NYCDOE licensed TESOL teacher will provide service for students and focus on administering and monitoring assessments like the ELL Periodic and NYSESLAT Certified ENL and general education teachers, some of whom hold dual certification in common branches and TESOL will provide service as well. Ms. Mikelaj 6th grade teacher TESOL and CB license servicing 6th graders Ms. Galeano Full-time ENL certified teacher serving students in 5-8 Ms. Schlesier: Full-time ENL certified teacher serving students in grade K-4 Types of materials: A variety of materials will be ordered that meet the needs of the target population. Materials will include trade books, dictionaries, leveled library books, materials for teacher made activities, etc. Vendors will include Book Source, Scholastic, Discovery Channel, and Pearson. In addition, we plan to use components of i-Ready instructional data to provide strategic academic instruction to students. Instruction will be individualized through the use of online learning programs (e.g. Discovery Education, Mathletics,Imagine Learning, MyOn Reader) . Classrooms will be equipped with computers, iPads and laptops to be utilized for the program. Specific titles/materials will be determined according to student need and will be ordered during the year as needs emerge. This program will also make use of materials that the school already owns including a Promethean Board, desktop computers and iPads. In each classroom students should have access to iPads, laptops and desktop computers. To ensure that all students are continually engaged in developing their language skills and to differentiate for different proficiency levels. Both Programs Students will benefit from going on field trips that align to the instruction and units of study. The overarching goal for both programs (After School and Saturday Academy is to increase NYSESLAT test takers that advance 2-4 levels (only 4 in 2018) and not remain at the same proficiency level( 29) as per the data in the EDAT tool. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 112  Part C: Professional Development The rationale for the professional development activities is to support the teachers who will instruct the English Language Learners with the most up-to-date ENL research strategies and techniques including SIOP strategies. Over the course of the professional development, the teachers will be equipped with strategies to help the students improve their reading comprehension and narrative, expository and argumentative writing skills so they can perform optimally on the NYSESLAT. The content area teachers working in this program will benefit from this training to learn helpful skills and strategies to teach ENL students. Teachers to Receive Training: Ms. Schelsier and Ms. Galeano , will receive district wide and local training. Additionally, ELL students' classroom teachers will participate in training to assist them in developing instructional strategies that are effective with ELLs. Professional development sessions will occur on Monday professional learning time, (every Monday during the school year) at grade meetings facilitated by coaches, assistant principals, lead teachers, and grade leaders. Also, professional development will occur off-site at citywide workshops provided by approved vendors (e.g. Teacher's College). Additionally, on-site school coaches in literacy, writing and mathematics will work with classroom teachers who serve ELLs to help them develop strategies to promote language development and reading and writing skills. Schedule and Duration: Training will take place during Monday and Tuesday's afternoon during professional development time, during grade level collaborative team meetings, and at specially organized professional learning time after school. Monday and Tuesday PD sessions take place weekly during the school year from September to June. Off-site workshops are scheduled by the vendors and take place approximately every month. Teachers will be provided opportunities through the form of Lunch and Learns. The following chart shows the projected date and topic for each ENL Lunch and Learn: Topics to be Covered: Professional Development topics will be customized to the needs of teachers from November to May and can include the following: Creating a Positive and Caring Community, Respecting Diverse Learners, Who Are Newcomers?, What Does LEP Mean?, Content and Language Objectives as an Integral Part of Instruction, SIOP Model, Sharing Best Practices, Conducting Read Alouds, Designing Effective Unit Plans, Developing year-long curriculum maps and pacing calendars, Engaging Parents with Immigrant and Newcomers, Using Internet Resources in Planning for Differentiated Instruction. Teachers will also attend ENL Professional Development workshops throughout the school year, and turnkey the information as directed by Manhattan Field Support. Name of provider: In School - Consultant literacy and math coaches, data coach, technology coach (Ms. Angela-Chi and Ms. Anne Denyse) Offsite - District and DOE staff (DELLs Office), Teachers' College. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 113  Part C: Professional Development Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: The purpose of PS/MS 123's ELL Parent Engagement Program is to provide workshops and activities to strengthen parents' literacy skills and to involve them in their children's education. Activities will be offered to all parents of English Language Learners. Additionally, Saturday ENL classes for parents are planned in conjunction with the Graham Windham staff and YMCA. Additionally , in collaboration with the school's Renewal partner, a series of inter-generational activities are planned throughout the year. The activities are designed to enhance student and family school engagement, provide services and information for families, and encourage learning together. Activities planned include Family Fun Day (September), Family Carnival(June), Character Assembly(October), Art Shows( ongoing), Awards Assemblies( January/May), Independent Reading Celebration(ongoing), Hispanic Cultural Celebration(October), Community Resource Fair(May), Read Aloud with Penguin Random House(1x a month), Community Harvest Feast(November), Martin Luther King Celebration(January), Family Math Night( 3x a year), Pastries With the Principal Family Workshops(1x a month). Topics to be Covered: It is anticipated that the following topics will be covered, but actual topics will be determined collaboratively by school staff, renewal partner staff, and parents. The Parent Coordinator will assist in publicizing and communicating these events to families. Topics will be based on parent needs and can include: - Literacy Development with Your Child - Assimilating to a New School - How to Read to Your Child - Family Fun Day- families will bring alive their cultural backgrounds and create a culturally tolerant school community - Winter and Spring Arts Festivals- will include student and parent voice in developing the program. Furthermore it will include the Arts team members (faculty) that will showcase a variety of cultural experiences that the y learned throughout their scheduled classes. - Writing/Cultural Celebrations- These celebrations will showcase students language acquisition and progress and even support adult English acquisition. Expectations of langauge and academic on grade level standards will be showcased through student work Name of Provider: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 114 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Renewal partner staff (Graham Windham) YMCA (on Saturdays) , classroom and ENL teachers How Parents Will Be Notified of these Activities: Parents will be notified through a variety of methods to ensure the greatest participation including: flyers, letters home, phone calls, at meetings with parents, telephone messenger. Additionally, the school's parent coordinator and family coach facilitate workshops for parents during monthly Parent Association meetings on topics of concern to all parents of PS/MS 123. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 115  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 05 School Name Mahalia Jackson School of Literacy and t Borough Manhattan School Number 123 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ms. Tina Hernandez Coach Ms. Gail Jeffries ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Mr. Scott Fried Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Mikelaj/Math Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Clarke/Common Branch Related-Service Provider Ms. Michelle Malverty/ SETTS&I Superintendent Ms. Gale Reeves Assistant Principal Ms. Brittany Velazquez Coach N/A School Counselor Ms. Vanessa Benitez Parent Ms. Shadell Barnhill Parent Coordinator n/a Field Support Center Staff Member Ms. Alice Cohen Other (Name and Title) Mary Norwood C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 RSCEP-R 116  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 530 Total number of ELLs 106 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 20.00% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 4 1 0 2 0 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 3 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Accelerated Reader, Gates MacGinite, Writing Benchmarks, and Degrees of Reading Power (DRP), as well as workshop model teaching are used to assess the literacy levels of students in grades K-8. The data let the teachers know the decoding and comprehension level of every student. They inform the school's instructional plan by telling the teachers the specific reading strategies each child needs to acquire. The ELL Periodic Assessment, is also used with ELLs to determine student progress and instructional needs. The NYSITELL and MOSL, along with the ELL Periodic enable the school to gather data on ELL progress. Triangulation of the data helps to identify the learner centered problems and inform the school's instructional plan. Using the Data Wise Protocol, the school monitors data regularly so teachers are able to adjust instruction to meet student needs. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 117  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Interim Assessments - Interim assessments are carefully selected so the assessments provide not only summative scores, but they evaluate student progress in specific areas in ELA. Assessment Calendar - Interim assessments are administered three times per year (fall, winter and spring). And assessment calendar is developed at the beginning of each year so that teachers can prepare accordingly. Team meetings During weekly Team Meetings teachers analyze student progress and needs. They utilize the Data Wise Protocol during these meetings to ensure that conversation is focused and time is utilized effectively and efficiently. Skedula - An online system for tracking student grades and progress on classroom assignments and interim assessments is utilized across the grades. Standardized School Portfolios - Portfolios are maintained for all student across the grades. The portfolio content is standardized based on a school developed checklist which is customized for each grade level. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of the program is determined by the number of students who achieve commanding level or gain a proficiency level on the NYSESLAT. We monitor and assess student portfolios, reading levels and NYSESLAT scores to evaluate progress toward English proficiency. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Summative data is only one measure of student progress. Together with formative data, an intervention plan is designed for students who are in need of additional attention. Special Materials - Fundations and Orton Gillingham provide additional support in word study, phonics and decoding. The materials are applicable for all students, inlcuding ELLs, general education and special education because they provide structured, targeted activities to develop basic reading and language skills. Additional Personnel - A full-time AIS teacher plus AIS services from staff from Graham Windham, the school's renewal partner. Online Learning - Students have the opportunity to utilize online learning services (Accelerated Reader, ST Math, MyOn Reader, IReady in Reading and Math, ST Math). All classrooms are equipped with desktop computers, laptops, iPads and electronic smart boards. Students and their parents can also access several programs at home. Coaching for teachers - Onsite coaches in reading, writing, mathematics work with teachers to enhance teaching skills to address students' individual needs. Programming - A literacy block is programmed into all classrooms schedules at the elementary level to afford teachers and students additional time for developing student's literacy skills. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The school utilizes formative and summative data to design specific interventions for students. RTI is continually assessed and services are adjusted to meet individual student needs. The school uses small groups, intervention strategies, strategic guided instruction (SGI) and Expanded Learning Time (ELT) within the RtI framework. We take into consideration the ELL's number of years of ENL instruction, their English and home language literacy, the results of the NYSESLAT, the ENL teacher's recommendation, the content area teacher's recommendation, parent or guardian request, sample of student work in English and if possible in their home language. In addition, the psychologist conducts a bilingual educational evaulation if the student is suspected of having a disability. In the case of long-term ELLs, we consider their English and home language literacy needs. If the student is SIFE, we consider their content area and socio-emotional support needs. The school also takes into consideration the data from various assessments to determine the appropriate services for the child. Teachers and administration use baseline, benchmark, and end-of-year assessments including State tests and other benchmark assessments in ELA (Fountas and Pinnell among others) and math to determine whether the student needs additional interventions such as small group work, one-on-one assistance, and focused work during Expanded Learning 2018-19 RSCEP-R 118  Time. Since these assessments are given at regular intervals over the course of the school year, teachers are able to adjust RtI as needed for these students. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT and ELL Periodic Assessments and ELA and Math NYSED Standardized exams, Benchmark Assessments from iReady are used to evaluate and inform ELL programs. Additionally. examining student work weekly at Team Meetings provides valuable information. Information is used for student grouping, small group instruction, ELT programming and AIS. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Student data is shared between and among teachers and discussed in depth at grade level team meetings. Additionally, data dives are conducted periodically during the school year at which teachers and administration discuss school wide trends, grade level trends, and individual student needs and interventions. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Mandated minutes of ENL (stand-alone and integrated) are determined by proficiency level on the NYSESLAT (NYSITELL for newly identified ELLs). Students are grouped heterogeneously (entering, emerging and transitional per their mandated minutes) in two consecutive grades (except for kindergarten which is served by itself) to ensure they receive the mandated minutes. Ms. Galeano and Mr. Fried provide stand-alone ENL services. Entering and emerging students receive 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL, and transitioning students receive 90 minutes of stand-alone ENL. The integrated part of the model takes place in collaboration with the homeroom teacher. All levels of ELLs receive this service in either their ELA class or another content area depending on their proficiency level. In class support includes team teaching with the ENL and classroom teacher, and creation of heterogeneous and homogeneous groups according to student language proficiency. Content areas for focus are ELA and math determined by student strengths. b. TBE program. If applicable. Response: N/A c. DL program. If applicable. Response: N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Mr. Fried the ENL teacher, creates a schedule based on the RLAT report which identifies the proficiency level of each ELL. Entering students receive 180 minutes of integrated ad 180 minutes of free-standing ENL. Emerging students receive 180 minutes of integrated and 180 minutes of free-standing ENL. Transitioning students receive 90 minutes of integrated and 2018-19 RSCEP-R 119  90 minutes of free-standing ENL. Expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL. Commanding students receive 90 minutes of integrated EN support for two years after testing out. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Differentiated instructional strategies in the Common Core Learning Standards and content areas are utilized to meet the ELLs' diverse learning needs. Teachers make provisions for ELLs in curriculum mapping and unit planning in all content areas. Instructional literacy and math tasks are differentiated to address the ELLs' academic needs. ELLs receive the same rigorous content instruction as their peers while engaged in improving their reading, writing, and speech in the English language. ENL methodology and instructional practice are aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards. Cooperative learning strategies are utilized, in addition to scaffolding, graphic organizers, information gap activities, interview grid, strip story, role playing, think-pair-share, popcorn, making connections, buddy read, choral read, questioning, predicting, making inferences, listening, brainstorming, and CAFE instruction. Additional instructional strategies are also used to make content comprehensible and to enrich our ELLs' language development. Various materials and resources are used to differentiate instruction. A balanced literacy approach integrates critical thinking skills while involving the practice of active listening, modeling of the text, and the connections made to the information. English Language Learners are encouraged to think critically, solve problems and communicate in the language of instruction. Strategies such as previewing, using prior knowledge, visualization and discussing vocabulary in context strengthens students' language and writing skills. Accountable talk strategies enhance language proficiency through oral discussion by modeling language acquisition for students. Questions are carefully crafted to promote higher level thinking skills. There are various materials used in the different programs. In the integrated ENL classrooms, the teacher uses the materials based on their particular curriculum. Math teachers make use of manipulatives. Lower grade teachers use Fundations and Orton Gillingham to work on phonics with the students. All teachers have word walls with visuals to help the newcomer ELLs. Additionally, the school uses a number of online programs including Achieve3000, Accelerated Reader, Starfall, MyOn Reader, ST Math, and Mathletics so the students can work independently. In the free-standing ENL classrooms, the teachers focus on building academic vocabulary through heavy use of high frequency words and grammatical skills. Teachers use a variety of manipulatives, technology, and centers teaching for instruction. In the lower grades, the ENL teachers use Fundations as well as alphabet charts to teach letter to sound correspondence. All these teachers have sentence strips so students can practice creating their own sentences. These teachers also have word games including Scrabble and Apples to Apples to help students become more comfortable manipulating the language. Since these students range from Entering to Transitioning levels, they generally need a lot of support at the word and sentence level and these materials are designed to give them such support. Content and language objectives are used to explicitly teach students and scaffold academic language at each level. In terms of native language support, all upper grade teachers have bilingual glossaries in their rooms in Spanish, French, and Arabic. Some teachers also have independent reading books in the students' first languages. Finally, some teachers are bilingual in Spanish or French, and they use those skills to communicate with the students as needed and support them in their content area instruction. For students who speak languages other than Spanish, French and Arabic, commanding students can serve as peer support for lesser proficient peers so they can acquire content knowledge. The ENL teacher provides content area support to ELLs by pushing in to the content area classrooms, which include English, Social Studies, Math, and Science. He collaborates with the teacher ahead of time so he can create a lesson plan based on the ongoing instruction in the classroom but which incorporates language functions and vocabulary that the ELLs need to focus on in order to succeed. In the classroom, he works with the ELLs in a small group, focusing on the skill that the teacher is teaching and incorporating the use of sentence starters and sentence frames to provide more scaffolding to the ELLs. Occasionallly, he will teach a mini-lesson to the class, focusing on skills that will benefit all students such as making use of visuals and improved methods for learning vocabulary. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 120  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The Spanish LAB informs instruction for Spanish Native Language. To evaluate in the other languages which the teachers do not speak, students are provided with books in their native language and asked to make a summary in English. For lower elementary students who cannot yet write, students point to pictures and then they say the words in their home language. Students are also introduced to and trained on how to use the Google translator app. Students also use bilingual glossaries and dictionaries to support their learning. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 6a. SIFE students are provided with instructional support specifically designed to meet their particular instructional needs in the development of literacy skills and content areas. The ENL teacher's schedule confirms the mandated number of instructional minutes. SIFE students are provided with differentiated tailored instruction visa computer-based instruction, independent work, and small group tutoring support. 6b. The instructional plan for newcomer ELLs registered in the school less than three years is based on the results of the students' NYSITELL/NYSESLAT assessments. Small group or individual instruction focuses on students' immediate needs to facilitate a smooth transition. In addition, the classroom teachers provide support to the newcomers by placing them in groups with native English language speakers, particularly students who share the same language. Students participate in small group, task-oriented situations that guide the production of language both in verbal and written forms. Students' seating arrangements enable them to clearly see and hear the teacher during the instructional process. Emphasis is placed on content instruction and vocabulary which is reinforced during ELA and ENL classes. Per students' assessment data in reading, math, and the last NYSESLAT exam results, student learning plans are created to target comprehension, writing, and vocabulary skills. All incoming ELLs participate in an orientation program which introduces students to new experiences and to provide a strong sense of belonging. A transitional process has been created from elementary to middle to high school. The process involves elementary and middle school students including ELLs in creating a comprehensive portfolio reflective of their school experiences. The portfolio will guide ELLs in selecting an appropriate middle and high school to foster movement toward their chosen career. 6c. Developing ELLs in levels Entering through Transitioning will receive differentiated instruction through the Imagine Learning Platform, which is an online learning tool. 6d. The instructional plan for long term ELLs in school 6 years or more will ensure that these students continue to receive their mandated ENL services. Additional academic support is provided through a Saturday program. 6e. The transitional team of teachers, counselors, parents and students creates a process to ensure a smooth transitional process for ELLs. This transition protocol can be easily replicated and modified each school year according to identified needs regarding ELLs, transitional activities, and feedback based on annual surveys. Emphasis is placed on familiarizing ELLs and their families with the school's programs, procedures, policies and expectations.For former ELLs, the school provides 90 minutes of integrated ENL weekly in their ELA or other content area class for two years after they passed (achieved Commanding level) on the NYSESLAT. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 121  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional Plans for Students with Disabilities are carefully designed. Special education students' IEPs are taken into consideration as well as their instructional needs determined by the students' NYSESLAT or NYSITELL scores. Both the special education teacher and the subject area teacher work collaboratively in an effort to streamline all instructional efforts to achieve higher performance goals. Grade level curriculum aligned with the Common Core Curriculum is differentiated to meet the diverse instructional needs of ELL-SWDs. Modifications are adapted in the content, process and product, when required to address the academic needs of each student to foster successful comprehension and recall understanding. Additional supports, such as ST Math are employed, which is an online program that is conceptually based for students to be able to master mathematical concepts without needing mathematical language. This is especially helpful for SWD. In addition, Imagine Learning is an online program for students to receive English instruction with support in their native language - another support for SWD. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDs are provided access to the school's curriculum, instruction, and resources. Per a schoolwide schedule all students are equally scheduled use of the computer lab and library to address the ELL-SWDs' academic needs. ELLs in self-contained classrooms, learn alongside general education students, particularly in gym and afterschool activities. These students are also targeted for Tier II and Tier III interventions. In ICT classrooms, the students with and without IEPs are combined, and the students regularly interact with each other. On almost every grade level, there is an ICT classroom. ELLs who have IEPs are generally placed in those classrooms. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted Academic Intervention Support for ELLs (AIS) is provided during the Expanded Learning Time (ELT). ELLs are offered academic intervention services in the identified areas of reading and writing, during the school day, ELT time, and Saturday Academy. ST Math and Fountas and Pinnell provide data that drives instruction. PS/MS 123's AIS Program is designed to further support ENL development, content area instruction, and review. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year a fulll-time AIS teaching position has been created. In addition, AIS services are provided by renewal staff in small group settings. Online learning resources ()i.e. ST Math, an online program for ELLs) will be utilized to develop conceptual understanding of math skills. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs for ELLs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are given the opportunity to participate in all schoolwide programs such as school trips, afterschool programs, and ELT. An ENL teacher runs the chess program and he invites all of his students to participate. He also makes them aware of other afterschool program in which they might be interested. The school sends home flyers in English and Spanish with all the students to inform them of activities to join. The ELLs are represented in equal proportion to their numbers in all afterschool activities. The services offered include chess, academic support, talent development drama, dance, and Saturday academic support. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 122  Audio, visual and computer based (e.g. ST Math, Discovery Education, iReady, Accelerated Reader, My On Reader) activities are used to differentiate and support instruction. All classrooms have computers, iPads, and laptops, and classroom libraries reflective of both English and native language libraries. Content support includes literature and dictionaries for math, science and social studies. Teacher prepared materials further support differentiated instruction. Imagine Learning, a program new to PS 123 will also be utilized. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Currently, the mode of instructions for ELLs is a Frestanding ENL Program. Home language support is provided via home language/bilingual dictionaries, glossaries, classroom libraries, the support of native speaker para-professionals, peer to peer instruction, home language texts, literature, and computer instruction in the home language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The New York State Common Core Learning Standards are aligned by grade level to create differentiated instructional services and resources. Emphasis is placed on ensuring that the ENL instructional program is appropriate for the students' age levels. Students are continually assessed through periodic interim assessments and data dives (which include student work samples) to ensure that instruction is grade and age appropriate. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Each year the school and charter school develop a usage plan to ensure that equal access to school space is provided to all. Programs for ELLs at PS 123 are developed and implemented by the school. The charter school develops its own programming. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Emphasis is placed on creating a positive home and school partnership. When feasible, communication is provided in the students' home language to enhance involvement in schoolwide activities. ELLs have the support of all school staff members. The parent coordinator and family coach provide school tours and information to the parents of ELLs regarding the school's classes for parents. The guidance counselor provides information regarding middle school and high school requirements to enhance involvement in the articulation process. ELLs are matched with buddies who speak their native language to foster social and emotional support. The buddies provide support to the ELLs in getting to know the school's expectations and the community. ELLs are encouraged to participate in the school's programs and activities. ELLs participate in schoolwide such as chess, visual arts, and dance classes. Emphasis is placed on the sharing of cultural traditions and foods to enable students to learn and respect different cultures. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? PS 123 plans to offer Spanish as an elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-R 123  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Rationale The rationale for the professional development activities is to support the teachers who will instruct the English Language Learners with the most up-to-date ENL research strategies and techniques including SIOP strategies. Over the course of the professional development, the teachers will be equipped with strategies to help the students improve their reading comprehension and narrative, expository and argumentative writing skills so they can perform optimally on the NYSESLAT. The content area teacher working in this program will benefit from this training to learn helpful skills and strategies to teach ENL students. Teachers to Receive Training:ENL teachers will receive training. Additionally, ELL students classroom teachers will participate in training to assist them in developing instructional strategies that are effective with ELLs. Language development professional development is provided during the year for all teachers (including cluster teachers) who serve ELLs in their classrooms.Schedule and Duration: Training will take place during Monday and Tuesday afternoon professional development time, during grade level collaborative team meetings, and at specially organized professional learning time after school. Training will also be provided by onsite coaches in literacy and math. Topics to be Covered:Professional Development topics will be customized to the needs of teachers, and can include the following: strategies for addressing the needs of ELLs in the classroom, serving newcomers, sharing best practices, looking at student work to determine student needs, analyzing interim assessment data as the basis for small group instruction, conducting read alouds, writing workshop, designing effective and comprehensive curriculum maps and pacing calendars, using technology to differentiate instruction and meet the needs of ELLs. Teachers will also attend ENL Professional Development workshops throughout the school year, both network and non-network workshops, and turnkey the information. Name of provider: In School - literacy coaches, instructional cabinet members, assistant principal and principalOffsite - District and DOE staff (Office of ELLs) 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The school provides professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 is dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all ENL teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours is dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Copies of professional learning agendas are stored in a central location (UFT Teachers' Center) and in the ELL room. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Since PS/MS 123 is a preK - 8 school, with grades 5 - 8 departmentalized, support to staff is provided across the grades to assist all students including ELLs as they transition from elementary to middle school. Teachers of ELLs reach out to their students' families to make sure they understand the process of entering middle school and the needs of students once they make that transition. The guidance counselor participates in collaborative professional learning to help ELLs adjust to school, how to 2018-19 RSCEP-R 124  work with students who had to leave their country due to some kind of trauma, and how to work with students who have a low proficiency level in English. For parents who cannot attend meetings, telephone outreach is made by school staff. However, all parents are encouraged to attend meetings. During Tuesday parent engagement time, at informal meetings, and at scheduled parent teacher conferences, the ENL teachers satisfy the requirements of the annual individual meetings with the parents of all ELLs over the course of the school year. During these conferences, the teacher discusses the goals of ENL, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results and language development needs in all content areas. An interpreter/translator is provided as necessary based on parent need. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. In promoting achievement across the elementary and middle school levels, the school community recognizes the parent as the child's first teacher, and that the parent's continued involvement is essential for the success of the learner. As part of the school's structure and daily practice, PS/MS 123 has implemented a schoolwide system that incorporates parent involvement in teachers/staff daily routines. When teachers make parent involvement part of their regular teaching practice, parents increase their interactions with their children at home, feel more positive about their abilities to help their children, and students improve their attitudes, attendance and achievement. The relationship between school, home, and the community is a critical factor essential for long term success and has a meaningful role in closing the achievement gap. The significant role of families, family-school relations, and parental involvement in education has become a crucial element in a child's advancement in career and college. Parent engagement and parent services are provided by a coordinated parent outreach team made up of the parent coordinator workingn collaboratively with renewal staff (i.e. parent coach, mental health workers, success mentors, community school director). The team enslists the services of other community based organizations such as the Mayors Office of Domestic Violence, Homebase, Greenhope Services for Women and Graham Windham Parenting Success. ELL parents can receive counseling, referral services, and home visits and participate in a variety of parent workshops designed according to the current needs of the parent population. In collaboration with Graham Windham, our Renewal Partner and other local community based organizations (e.g. YMCA, Beacon) a variety of well-attended intergenerational activities are offered for all parents. Activities include Family Fun Day, Bring Your Parent To School Day, The activities are scheduled during the school day, in the evening, and on Saturdays. ELL parents and families are integrated into the school community, and are served alongside other families in the school community. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 125 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Melitina Hernandez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 126  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS/MS 123 School DBN: 05M123 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ms. Tina Hernandez Title Principal Ms. Brittany Velazquez Assistant Principal Ms. Tanya Olivo Parent Coordinator Mr. Scott Fried ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Brittany Sparrow Parent Ms. Galeano Ms. Milkelaj Ms. Jeffries N/A Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Ms. Benitez School Counselor Ms. Danika Rux Ms. Alice Cohen N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 N/A 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-R 127  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 05123 School Name: Mahalia Jackson Preparatory Academy Superintendent: Ms. DanikaRux The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Gail Jeffries Language Access Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written oral communication, we use Part 3 of the HLIS, ATS reports, Student Emergency Contact cards, and a language preference form which is distributed to all newly entering students. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral x 67% n/a n/a 2018-19 RSCEP-R 128  English Spanish French Arabic x n/a n/a 24% n/a n/a n/a x x n/a 4% 3% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent Handbook September and ongoing Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Spanish translation provided at school. Other languages as requested by parent. Entitlement Letters September 2017 and ongoing Translated by NYCDOE Parent/Teacher Conferences September 2017, Nov. 2017, March 2018 , May 2018 NYS Testing April - May 2017 Spanish, French translated at school. Translation and Interpretation Unit will be contacted for Arabic Spanish, French translated at school. Translation and Interpretation Unit will be contacted for Arabic 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide .Parent Teacher Conference November 2017. Curriculum Night September 2017 interpretation service(s)? Spanish, French translators on site. Arabic will contact translation services Spanish, French translators on site. Arabic will contact translation services 2018-19 RSCEP-R 129  Community Forum May 2017 Parent Teacher Conference March 2017 Spanish, French and Arabic translators on site. Arabic will contact translation services Spanish, French and Arabic translators on site. Arabic will contact translation services 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Phone Messenger, personal phone calls to individual families Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. ENL Professional Development held weekly for ENL teachers. Language outreach PDs on Chancellor's Conference Days. Monday PDs will include ENL training. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) PS/MS 123 will fulfill the parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services as outlined in Section VII of the Chancellor’s Regulations A-663. See DOE Home Page. Directory of Offices & Divisions. Translation & Interpretation Unit for details. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The NYCDOE Parent Survey is distributed to parents in home language 2018-19 RSCEP-R 130 
