 27Q400 School Name: AUGUST MARTIN HIGH SCHOOL Principal: RORY PARNELL 2018-19 RSCEP-ON 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Career and Technical Education (CTE) Programs (for high schools) Section 10: Professional Development Plan Section 11: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 12: Title I Program Information Section 13: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information August Martin High School 27Q400 342700011400 9-12 156-10 Baisley Blvd. Jamaica, NY 11434 718 528-2920 School Number (DBN): 718 949-2351 Phone Number: Rory Parnell Fax: Email Address: RParnel@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Geographical District: 27 Superintendent’s Office Address: Child Center of New York Rory Parnell Saran Shields Erika Maldonado Rory Parnell Pauline Wright ShohanKhandakar KhalikMartin District Information Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Pl. Juan Mendez Flushing, NY 11354 jmendez2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 3  718-281-7696 718-281-7519 Phone Number: Queens South FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Nathan Dudley Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd. Ozone Park, NY 11416 NDudley@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-521-5303 Phone Number: Fax: 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. School Receivership In April 2015, state lawmakers and Governor Andrew Cuomo created section 211-f of the State Education Law, which established the School Receivership program as a new intervention strategy to turn around struggling schools. This new law, and Commissioner’s regulation 100.19, requires that “Persistently Struggling Schools,” defined as Priority Schools that have been in the most severe accountability status since the 2006-07 school year, be given an initial one or two-year period under a “Superintendent Receiver”. These schools were placed in receivership under the New York City Schools Chancellor. Each school must make demonstrable improvement on specific benchmarks or it will be placed under an independent receiver. Under the Chancellor’s Receivership Plan, the School Renewal Program is NYCDOE’s 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 5  core strategy for turning around struggling schools. Renewal Schools have already begun implementing significant interventions and are receiving additional resources and support to accelerate student performance and help close achievement gaps reflected in this RSCEP. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. The RSCEP will also enable Renewal Schools that were designated as “Out of Time” Priority Schools during the 2014-15 school year to respond to additional state-mandated requirements, including: providing students access to Career and Technical Education (CTE) program offerings at schools in Good Standing beginning in the 2018-19 school year; and, mandatory professional development for school leadership and staff. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 6  The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 7  In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 8  on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional SLT exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit the school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update the school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Community School, Career and Technical Education Program (CTE), and Professional Development Plan sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group Rory Parnell Erika Maldonado CatinaParker Sharon Jenkins Saran Shields ShohanKhandakhar KhalikMartin Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 10  Check if SLT X X X X X X X n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Allison Pirone Maria CraanVelez Michelle Morales Cathleen Shaw Norma Rolsten Pauline Wright ToralvMunro n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Teacher Teacher Teacher Parent Parent Parent Parent n/a Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Community Engagement Team (CET) Signature Page Directions: Please fill out this form and indicate members of your Community Engagement Team. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each Community Engagement Team member in the first column. 2. Record the position and constituent group represented in the second column. 3. Community Engagement Team members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If a Community Engagement Team member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original signature page. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Rory Parnell Erika Maldonado Chairperson UFTRepresentative 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 11 Signature (Blue Ink) Name Position and Constituent Group ToalvMunro Sharon Jenkins Saran Shields KhalikMartin ShohanKhandakar Allison Pirone Michelle Morales YaritzaRodriguez CatinaParker n/a n/a n/a n/a Represented PTAPresident DC37 Representative CBODirector Student Student Teacher Teacher Teacher Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 12  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. August Martin High School's mission is to provide every scholar with a rigorous academic experience in a supportive and nurturing learning community. August Martin High School is a small school where scholars are challenged and held to high expectations through our student-centered approach to learning. We are a community that emphasizes and respects individuality, diversity, collaboration and inquiry. We work diligently to meet the social, emotional and academic needs of every scholar while preparing them for college and career through our culinary and aviation programs and our partnership with Child Center of New York, our Community Based Organization. Our mission is to not only inculcate in every scholar the academic skills and habits of mind that lead to success in college and career, but to inspire life-long learning. August Martin scholars are resilient and eager to learn. August Martin High School scholars are historically known for their passion for the community and the power of their collective voice. Named after the first black commercial airline pilot in the United States, August Martin High School is committed to staying true to the strength and courage embedded in its historical roots. Our learning community is dedicated to supporting our scholars in achieving self-determination as well as academic success through our school’s community empowerment initiatives, youth leadership programs (i.e. Martin Ambassadors) as well as through our strong social-emotional supports, which are deeply rooted in our core values and the mission of the school. Our community is committed to promoting academic excellence while cultivating the leader in all of our young men and women. All stakeholders of our learning community believe that a key lever to school improvement, specifically in the area of scholar outcomes, resides in giving scholars choice and making learning relevant. We accomplish this end by remaining true to the foundation in which our school was founded by promoting 21st century skills as well as threading our learning community with our core values of scholarship, service, advocacy, leadership, perseverance, community, inquiry, collaboration and community. Our partnership with Child Center of New York ( CCNY ), a Community Based Organization ( CBO ), has helped our scholars to develop a more refined understanding of what it means be both men and women but active citizens. The creation of Martin Ambassadors serves as the foundation and model for all our leadership groups. August Martin High School believes when educators, families and community groups work purposefully and collaboratively to support learning, scholars tend to stay engaged, stay in school longer, and enjoy their school experience. AMHS provides a welcoming environment for all members of our learning community, including families and visitors, by ensuring that everyone is treated respectfully and that all voices are heard. Families at AMHS have multiple avenues to engage with the greater community to address challenges, support scholar development, celebrate learning and student growth. AMHS is a learning community where scholars are known as individuals, receive personalized education based on inquiry, problem solving, engaging in real world tasks, and reflection are the center of learning. All scholars construct the knowledge, skills, and habits of mind necessary to succeed in a challenging post-secondary programs, which will ultimately support their success in the 21 st century global 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 13  marketplace. AMHS scholars will be active members in the community creating a positive impact for future generations. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q400 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 334 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 25 27 6 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 22 14 11 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 80.5% % Reduced Lunch 8.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 4.8% 13.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 73% 57% 60.2% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO YES No N/A 144 123 9 82.5% 4.2% 21.6% 68.6% 10.2% 6.6% 2 18% 11.9 N/A N/A 61% 61% 51.5% 2% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A YSH YSH N/A N/A N/A YSH YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Scholar centered instruction is the core of teaching and learning at August Martin High School. Classrooms reflect authentic learning opportunities where scholars engage in meaningful discussion, close reading, problem solving and writing across content areas. Our Instructional Focus, If we, as educators, plan and implement rigorous tasks while providing personalized, actionable feedback that holds our scholars accountable, then scholars will demonstrate their understanding of how to progress in their learning, has served as a pillar for Professional Learning, Cabinet Level Inquiry, coaching and creating a common language about high expectations with all stakeholders. This instructional focus came to fruition during the 2017-2018 school year, and we will continue building on this work in the 2018-2019 year. During the course of our work, we were able to create a Rigorous Task Framework that we utilize to assess our scholar-centered tasks. As a staff we have defined rigor and begun to supplement our CC aligned Engage ELA and Math, New Visions science and Global History, and Debating US History curricula with authentic task creation in order to have scholars engage with academic content on a more meaningful level. Through the implementation of rigorous instruction across classrooms we have been able to increase our graduation rate from 63% to 73%, as of August 2018. Additionally, our school has dedicated one period of professional development weekly to Rigorous Task PD facilitated by the instructional leaders of the the school. Aligning our time and resources to supporting the growth of our teachers in this area also yielded positive results on the school surveys in this area. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 16  To support teaching and learning, we utilize Cabinet Level Inquiry. This team, comprised of administration, teachers and AMHS scholars meet weekly to assess instruction through the lens of our Rigorous Tasks Framework. Through non-evaluative classroom visits and analyzing teacher tasks and scholar work, the work of our Cabinet Level Inquiry Team hinges on improving the quality of education for scholars in the classroom. Based on last year’s MOTP data, 7 teachers received a Developing, while 10 teachers received an Effective. Through our work with Cabinet Level Inquiry, we aim to move teacher practice by supporting pedagogical practice around creating and implementing rigorous tasks, thus making the learning experience more authentic and scholar centered. Through our work in developing formative assessment practices, teachers have adopted common practices that scholars see threaded throughout their classes, across grades and content areas. Such uniform practices include Checks for Understanding, Stop Lights and Placemat activities. Further, we have developed a uniform system for providing feedback in the form of Glows, Grows and Next Steps. Scholars and teachers, alike, provide feedback in this format both during class and as written feedback on assessments, projects and class assignments. Area of Need: We must implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. As we move into our second year of work supported by our Instructional Focus, we must make use assessment data to adjust our curriculum to better represent the instructional shifts. As noted by our Quality Review (May 2018), Quality Indicator 1.1 was rated "proficient", with feedback indicating that integration of instructional shifts beyond text-based evidencing as an area of need. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? Overarching Vision for Rigorous Instruction at August Martin High School: August Martin High School is a school community built around high expectations for instruction, ensuring it is clear, well-structured, and adaptive to students, encouraging them to build and apply knowledge. Our pedagogy and practice is deeply embedded in our Instructional Focus: If we, as educators, plan and implement rigorous tasks while providing personalized, actionable feedback that holds our scholars accountable, then scholars will demonstrate their understanding of how to progress in their learning. Our Instructional Focus is the cornerstone for professional learning and the yardstick by which we measure effective instruction at August Martin High School. Implementation of the Instructional Focus is supported through multiple initiatives, including Cabinet Level Inquiry, Rigorous Task PDs, the creation of the Rigorous Tasks Framework and the Formative Assessment Framework and common planning. Our vision for promoting the Instructional Focus across classrooms includes scholars taking ownership of their learning by being able to articulate their learning, as well as their areas of growth. Scholars engage daily in close reading, writing, discussion and problem solving. Teachers serve as facilitators and guides to the learning and have established set systems and routines so that learning is accessible, interesting and relevant to scholars lives. Teachers give both written and verbal feedback, and scholars are able to use that feedback to refine their work. What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? All teachers will use assessment data to adjust pacing calendars and instruction, while providing appropriately scaffolds for scholar learning. Scholars will engage in learning by participating in Rigorous Tasks, reflecting in writing, writing across content areas and common annotation strategies for close reading practices. In addition, scholars will maintain a 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 17  portfolio of their authentic work products, which will demonstrate their process of learning, from planning to publishing. While the curriculum is rigorous and aligned to CCLS, it is modified to meet the needs of our scholars. Modifications to the curriculum include: adjustments to pacing, subtractive planning, supplementing authentic learning experiences and tasks (Ex: Socratic seminars) and differentiated tasks for scholars who need additional support or opportunities for enrichment. What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? Programming: ● Scholar programming will be responsive to student need and data cycles as well as the product of the Programming Committee that will include school leaders, UFT members, and CCNY staff. ● All scholars will be engaged in an extended learning day consisting of a 7.5 hour day (7:25AM-2:53PM) inclusive of lunch. During zero period, from 7:25-8:13, scholars take courses that support their social-emotional development, physical and mental acuity or college support program. All 9th grade scholars participate in Restorative Justice classes, while tenth and eleventh graders take either yoga, weight training, chess, music, or art. Our twelfth graders participate in a daily College and Career Readiness program, where they receive support with the college application and selection process, support with writing their college essays and financial aid support.  Our current tenth graders will take the ELA Regents at the end of grade 10, which will allow us to offer AP English Language and Composition in the eleventh grade and AP Literature and Composition when they are in the 12th grade.  Additional AP Courses have been added in the 2018-2019 SY: AP Studio Art and AP Environmental Science.  Ninth grade scholars take an additional period of math.  Peer Enabled Restructured Classrooms (PERC) engages 9th grade PERC students in Algebra I to work in small groups with Teaching Assistant Scholars (TAS) leading their instruction. An additional period of TAS instruction is provided. What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? Teachers create multiple entry points into daily lessons and activities, provide assessment criteria and have established systems and routines in their classrooms that allow scholars to collaborate with peers, apply close reading strategies and write daily. Teachers use formative assessment to adjust instruction, grouping and differentiated tasks. It is expected that teachers have an Instructional Objective posted daily that contains language connected to the CCLS and a by-statement. An itemized agenda is referenced as the lesson progresses. Further, scholars maintain and utilize the portfolios to reflect on their progress over the course of the year. How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? Through the use of do-nows, scholar self-assessment, checklists and grading criteria and differentiated tasks, teachers provide opportunities for all scholars to engage meaningfully in their learning and progress. Teachers utilize opportunities for scholars to reflect in writing following summative assessments, projects and in-class discussion. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 18  What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? Comprehensive assessments will be used to adjust pacing and curriculum implementation. Teachers and teams will administer baseline assessments created to reflect areas of growth and high frequency skills and standards per June 2018 Regents Data. Data from these assessments will be used to adjust pacing and identify populations of scholars for targeted academic intervention. Teachers will administers 2 interim assessments during each semester to assess scholar progress in demonstrating high frequency skills and meeting frequently assessed standards. An end of semester comprehensive exam will serve as a summative assessment of scholar growth and will aid in making curricular decisions for the Spring 2019 term. Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) Baseline Interim Assessments; mock Regents Formative Benchmark Gates McGiinty Diagnostic Comprehensive Exams Summative Part 3 – Annual Goal 9-12 9-12 9 9-12 To modify pacing and adjust curriculum To track scholar progress and teacher effectiveness and modify pacing and adjust curriculum Identify scholar reading levels Assess scholar learning Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, we will receive a 3.5 or higher on our Framework for Rigorous Instruction index through focused professional development on Rigorous Instruction and the use of assessment data to revise curriculum and instruction. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? Progress Toward Graduation Years 2 and 3: 58% Framework: Rigorous Instruction: 3.5* (School Survey) 4-Year Graduation Rate: 80%. Regents Completion Rate: 50.0% College-Readiness: 30% 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 19  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Teachers Framework: Rigorous Instruction: 3.5* (School Survey) Mondays, September 2018-June 2019 Principal Rigorous Tasks PD held every Monday with a focus on assessing alignment between teacher practice and the Rigorous Task Framework. Cabinet Level Inquiry will meet weekly to support the implementation of Rigorous Tasks. The team will review teacher tasks, conduct learning walks and provide non-evaluative feedback to teachers on strategies to improve Data Wise Inquiry Meets in content teams using Data to develop action plans and intervention strategies. Teams use protocols to review scholar work, teacher tasks and participate in inter-visitation to assess and adjust instructional practices Assistant Principals Regents Completion Rate: 50.0% Science and Social Studies Department Framework: Rigorous Instruction: 3.5* (School Survey) September 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Regents Completion Rate: 50.0% Core Content Area Teachers Regents Completion Rate: 50.0% Mondays, September 2018-June 2019 Principal College-Readiness: 30% Assistant Principals Teacher Leaders How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Teacher PDs will be responsive to teacher needs and offer opportunities to create and assess Rigorous Tasks and review scholar work samples The team will analyze Advance data and conduct learning walks aligned to the Rigorous Task Framework Adjustments made to pacing, curriculum and intervention strategies with a focus on a Target Population of scholars who will take the Regents exams 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 20  Progress Toward Graduation Years 2 and 3: 58% Data Chats All Teachers Progress Toward Graduation Years 2 and 3: 58% College-Readiness: 30% Each marking period, teachers will meet with the Principal and supervising Assistant Principal to discuss scholarship data, Advance data and assessment data. Together, with the support of administration, teachers will create action plans to address areas of need. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement Following baseline administration and interim assessments, September 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal in June 2019 for the first time. In conjunction with the supervising assistant principal, teachers will set, assess, and revise instructional strategies using assessment data. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The following Parent Engagement activities will be key in engaging parents as partners in our vision of rigorous instruction: 1. PTA meetings 2. Coffee with the Principal 3. Extended Cabinet 4. Curriculum Night (September 2018) 5. Parent Teacher Conferences 6. Authentic Assessment Celebration Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. 1. A Master Teacher and Model Teacher will provide coaching support, create model classrooms and lead Professional Learning. 2. CCNY staff will support ELT (zero period) and provide support with College Readiness and Wellness classes. 3. Scan-tron machines and IO Assessment has been purchased to support data collection. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 21  4. PERC mentor and professional development 5. Common planning time and Professional Development in teachers' schedules 6. Per-session for teachers (TAS mentoring and zero period) 7. AP courses, exams, materials, PD 8. Curricula and materials (Engage, New Visions, CUNY Facing US History) 9. Classroom resources (books and technology) 10. Skedula 11. Additional period of math instruction for 9th graders Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG or SIF Grant 21st Century School Success Grant C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Who:  All teachers are responsible for implementing daily Rigorous Tasks as determined by the school's "Rigorous Task Framework" [(1)requires scholars to provide evidence, justification or rationale, (2) Contains a prompt with guiding questions, guidelines, discussion protocols, or clearly delineated steps and checklist for self- assessment, (4) Leads to work product that demonstrates scholars' ability to problem-solve, think critically and/or argue persuasively]  Data Wise teams create, administer and disaggregate data from Baseline assessments and interim  assessments Instructional Cabinet is responsible for providing weekly Rigorous Task PDs that are responsive to trends observed during cabinet level inquiry walk-throughs, instructional walk-throughs and teacher observations  All teachers are responsible for choosing target scholars based on Baseline data and monitor progress When: Implementation Data Collection Periods Impact Data Collection Dates Marking Period 1: Marking Period 1: -Cabinet Level Inquiry Baseline walk-through: September 26, 2018 - School-wide pre-term baseline assessment: September 19-20, 2018 -Cabinet Level Inquiry: October 2-19, 2018 - Interim assessment 1: October 15, 2018 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 22  Marking Period 2: Marking Period 2: Cabinet Level Inquiry: October 22- November 30, 2018 - Interim assessment 2: November 14, 2018 Marking Period 3: Target scholar group selections: December 3,2018- January 30, 2019 Marking Period 3: - Interim assessment 3: December 10, 2018 - School-wide post-term baseline assessment: January 16-17, 2019 How: Implementation: Instructional Cabinet, consisting of a Master Teacher, Model Teacher and Math Lead, will engage in instructional walk-throughs on a weekly basis. These rounds are framed around the instructional focus (rigorous tasks) and the team consistently collects data using the agreed up four components of a rigorous task. Team provides feedback to the target teachers (determined based on the baseline walk-through) on a weekly, which includes glows, grows and next steps. Impact: Each department examines and analyzes disaggregated data from the standards based common interim assessments. Overall and teacher-specific results and discussed at Data Wise meeting and content teams identify trends to recommend intervention modifications Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1. Advance Data for teacher observations in domains 3b, 3c, 3d. 2. 3. Common post baseline assessment Interim Assessment commo core aligned assessments Part 6c. In February 2018, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review)? School Strengths: At August Martin High School, we pride ourselves in creating an environment where all of our stakeholders feel safe, supported, and challenged. Our school has systems in place that support our growth in fostering a supportive environment. We prioritize the safety of our scholars by creating an environment where they will be free from judgement, distractions and where high academic expectations are fostered. Our scholars start their day with different forms of advisories, which serves as a morning check-in should any of them need support prior to engaging fully in their academics. As it pertains to discipline, we have adopted a restorative approach in which our Restorative Justice Officers facilitate circles when faced with any scholar infractions that could jeopardize the school culture and the emotional well-being of any scholars. Scholars are supported academically through various review courses as well as after school programs that ensure their success in current classes and regents examinations. Through our CBO, scholars are offered SAT prep as well as academic tutoring for classes they are currently enrolled in. In addition, they have been enrolled in regents preparatory course after school in the event that they have failed any exams in the past or are registered for any during the next regents offering. As a community, we acknowledge that the most meaningful way to support a scholar academically is to have them in school and offer them the highest quality instruction available. To this end, we have created two attendance teams to target 9-10th and 11-12th graders at a more granular and individualized manner. Our grade teams also fold into the social-emotional support provided to scholars by identifying any scholars who may be at risk and providing appropriate interventions to our mental health clinics, PPT, after school tutoring services or Success Mentoring Program. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 24  Having provided multiple streams of support allows us to foster a challenging academic environment where scholars can safely engage in productive struggles day after day. Across classrooms, teachers use assessment, rubrics and grading policies that support the school's vision for learner-centered rigor and exploration. To this end, the school has adopted feedback practices of providing glows, grows and next steps in real time and for all major assignments. According to the most recent quality review, "students came to a quick consensus when reporting on the value of their teacher's written feedback and their consistent feedback." Needs and Priorities: An area of growth identified is attendance and considering the role of a supportive environment in a scholar's ability to come to school despite other obstacles is crucial for our community. Although the majority of scholars stated in their school surveys that they feel safe and supported by their teachers while at school, it is imperative for us to consider the scholars who struggle to consistently attend and who may have fallen behind their peers in credit and regents accumulation. To this end, we are must prioritize the attendance of our scholars who are missing any credits or regents to be considered on track to graduate with their cohort. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? Restorative Justice: AMHS will develop a restorative approach to discipline that enables students to play an active role in meeting social, emotional and behavioral goals. AMHS will set up a support team that consists of an Assistant Principal, Youth Development Specialists and Guidance Counselors that work with students and their families to follow restorative discipline protocols. Students will participate in a reflective process using goal-setting, behavioral and academic tracking systems, peer mediation and peer mentorship to restore and adjust behavior to meet the high behavioral expectations of the AMHS learning community. Restorative discipline empowers students to resolve conflicts on their own. Pupil Personnel Team(PPT): PPT consists of a school-based social worker, special education lead, parent coordinator, school psychologist, and Community Based Organization member ( CBO ) supporting self-contained, Integrated Co-Teaching and general education students transitioning to a least restrictive environment. The team meets weekly to address the needs of our scholars and work to individualize their August Martin academic experience. In addition, this team is responsible for monitoring tiered interventions (behavioral and academic) in order to ensure the success of of our scholars. Attendance Team: Our attendance teams are divided into one 9th and 10th grade team and one 11th and 12th grade team to ensure that no scholar falls through the cracks. These teams consist of CBO members, principal, corresponding restorative justice officer and the guidance counselor for the corresponding grades. This new approach to targeting scholar attendance will allow us to more accurately identify target scholars and to intervene with home visits, referrals to our CBO or in-school clinic, which in essence disrupts any interruption in formal education and achievement for our scholars. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner Child Center of New York Attendance CBO Focus 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 25  How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? CCNY will work in tandem and inclusive of AMHS administrative team to utilize an inquiry approach to attendance tackling sub groups of scholars to meet their social-emotional needs to increase their attendance and academic performance. This will provide additional engagement for parents because parents will be asked into the school more often to speak with their scholars teachers, counselors, and administration. Additionally, parents will be provided data regularly of their scholars absences. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, the school will increase the attendance rate from 83% to 84.0% through the development of a grade specific Advisory programs and attendance teams that provide a nurturing environment and appropriate streams of support to meet the needs of all constituents and foster civic and academic excellence. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Scholar Attendance: 84% 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 26  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Attendance Team: Team will be split into 9-10th grade and 11-12th grade and will be used to identify persistently absent scholars who may need referrals for additional support. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) 9-12 Grades Scholar Attendance: 84% September 5th, 2018- June 26th, 2019 Principal Guidance Counselors Community School Director Scholar Attendance: 84% October 1, 2018- June 26, 2019 Community School Director Principal 9-12 Success Mentoring Program: Scholars who are at risk according to attendance data (80-90% attendance) will be assigned a school based mentor. Scholars will be matched with their teachers or other staff members and some mentors will keep their mentees from the previous year to maintain consistency for the scholars. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in attendance for target scholars identified. Team will also analyze overall attendance trends when data is disaggregated by grade and day of the week. Monthly updates will be provided to each mentor that includes attendance data for each of their mentees. The data will include any previous but pertinent attendance data as well as current attendance data. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 27  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be made aware of initiatives and progress that the school is making towards creating the most supportive environment possible through various initiatives during the school year. August 2018 Parents will receive invitations and will attend grade-specific orientations for their scholars. At this orientation, the principal and any other staff will share academic expectations as well as well as avenues of support available to promote the success of each individual scholars. September 2018 October 2018 November 2018 "Meet the Teacher Night" will give families an opportunity to join August Martin Staff and to familiarize themselves with all of the teachers who will be supporting the growth of their scholars. In addition, this event will present an opportunity to sign consent for any referrals that have already been submitted by teachers and to discuss concerns with IEP coordinator, guidance counselors or administrators. Families will be invited to a "Rights to Know" meeting in which Special Education Liaison, ENL specialist and Senior Class Advisers will be dissemination crucial information to the success of their scholars. The will discuss topics ranging from graduation requirements to promotional criteria and levels of support available to scholars who fall within any of these subgroups. Families will be invited to a college and career fair to take place the morning before parent teacher conferences. At this fair parents will have the opportunity to attend resume workshops for themselves and their scholar, to speak to college representatives from schools in the NYC metro area and to participate in financial literacy workshops that will promote the financial success of our scholars while in college. December 2018 Scholars and parents will be invited to participate in a community game night. At this time, the principal will present attendance awards for scholars who have 95% attendance and above. January- June 2019 Families will be invited to SLT/ CTE/ PTA meeting which will take place during the school day and in after school to promote family participation. At this point the principal will share school data, projections for the first semester and will collaboratively brainstorm additional ways to support scholars. February 2019 Families will be invited to a family concert night where our scholars will be performing spoken word, playing instruments and singing. This day we will also display art created by our scholars on the main lobby of our building for parents and family members to enjoy. March/ April 2019 Our CBO will host an immigration clinic to support any of our at risk populations and their families. At this even parents will be provided free legal advise from immigration lawyers. There will be general and targeted outreach conducted to promote attendance to this event and families will be reassured about the confidentiality of their conversations. May/ June 2019 Our CBO and Success Mentors will be hosting two events for mentees and their families. This even will be a celebration and an opportunity for stakeholders to familiarize themselves with the resources available to support them throughout the summer. The vocational coordinator (through our CBO) will be present and supporting any scholars in obtaining working papers and completing Summer Youth Employment applications. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 28  1. Space dedicated for CBO 2. Time scheduled for weekly attendance meetings 3. Releasing identified teachers to attend SLT and PTA meetings during the day 4. Resources allocated to support home visits 5. Uniforms provided to students who need it to ensure they feel part of the school community 6. Restorative Justice training (ongoing) 7. Dedicated time in teacher schedules to attend Grade Team Meetings 8. Building permits to host events after school 9. Per session for teachers doing PM school and Regents Prep courses Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG or SIF Grant 21st Century School Success Grant C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Who:  All teachers are responsible for conducting outreach when scholars are absent  Grade specific attendance teams meet consistently to track attendance trends and target scholars who may need additional supports to be successful while consistently attending schools  CBO is responsible for desegregating success mentee data and sending it to individual success mentors  Success mentors build relationships with each mentee and meet with them When: Implementation Data Collection Periods Marking Period 1: Attendance Team Meetings and CTE Meeting: September 5- October 19, 2018 Marking Period 2: Attendance Team Meeting and CTE Meeting: October 22- November 30 2018 Impact Data Collection Dates Marking Period 1: Attendance Data By Grade: Daily Attendance Data for target scholars: Weekly Attendance data for success mentees: Bi-weekly Marking Period 2: Attendance Data By Grade: Daily Attendance Data for target scholars: Weekly Attendance data for success mentees: Bi-weekly 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 29  Marking Period 3: Attendance Team Meeting and CTE Meeting: December 3- January 30, 2019 Marking Period 3: Attendance Data By Grade: Daily Attendance Data for target scholars: Weekly Attendance data for success mentees: Bi-weekly How: Implementation: Teams will meet for attendance discussions and data review a total of 4 times per week. The 9-10th grade team meets twice and the 11-12th grade team meets twice. At that meetings, target scholars are chosen based on the team's assessment of their attendance. At that time, they are also referred to services at the clinic or mental health counseling at the school. CTE meetings are used to discuss the number of new referrals and additional opportunities available for scholars such as internships and work based learning opportunities. Impact: Teams review attendance data consistently and adjusts support systems and outreach intensity accordingly. At this time, teams assess whether the increase in outreach and supports is yielding to improved attendance and if not then the team begins to uncover why the mis-alignments may be taking place. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS attendance records will be used to measure and assess progress in this area. Number of referrals for mental health services or other services through our CBO. Part 6c. In February 2018, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed X X X X 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? School's Strengths: August Martin has the systems and structures necessary to support teacher collaboration. We currently have two teacher leaders (Model Teacher and Master Teacher) who support coaching new teachers as well as veteran teachers who have been identified as needing additional support. Our school surveys revealed that our teachers consider our school a collaborative place where they place their trust. Consequently, teacher schedules have been planned in a way that allows us to work as Professional Learning Communities (PLC's). Teachers have a daily opportunity to collaborate as a community and with colleagues across contents and grades:  Monday- Rigorous Tasks Meeting  Monday Afternoon- Data Wise Inquiry Meeting  Tuesday- Integrated Co-teaching (ICT) Meeting  Wednesday- Grade Team Meeting  Thursday- Common Planning Meeting  Friday- Common Planning Meeting A vast majority of our classrooms are co-taught and we wanted to respond accordingly and provide the support necessary for teachers to succeed. We have facilitated two cycles of six-session ICT PDs, with the support of the ASE at the BFSC, in which teachers from other schools and our own conduct classroom walk-throughs and provide feedback to our teachers in regards to the implementation of several ICT models. It is safe to say that our co-teaching partnerships consistently utilize station teaching, parallel teaching and alternative teaching. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 31  Needs and Priorities: The School Survey demonstrates a disparity in teacher collaboration and the direct impact that is has had on student achievement. An area of opportunity we intend to tap into is the achievement of our scholars on regents examinations. Although our Data Wise teams started inter-visitations in the 2017-2018 SY, which requires a trust and openness characteristic of collaborative teachers, we uncovered some inconsistencies in the way that teaching of the same skills and competencies manifested itself in different classroom. As such, we must move in a direction of cohesion across classrooms, grades and teachers. To this end, common assessments should be administered per content for the 9-10 and 11-12 grade bands. Data Wise will anchor and inform our work around common assessments and threads across grades in specific contents. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? Our vision for collaborative teachers is to create cohesion across contents within every grade band. Our collaboration amongst teachers should transcend the walls of the rooms where our PLCs take place and be evident across classrooms and teachers. We intend to create assessments (in adherence to our assessment calendar) that are common and will lend themselves to deeper conversations in PLCs. If the assessments are common, then our teachers can begin to engage in the work of norming expectations and diving into collaboratively unpacking standards that our scholars are to meet. Teachers and team leaders will work together to create target scholars for the entire content team and for their classes. How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? Our school Instructional Cabinet consists of the Principal, two Assistant Principals and two teacher leaders. The cabinet meets collectively once per week to discuss progress and necessary adjustments. Moreover, the principal has time set aside to meet with Data Wise leads, teacher leaders and assistant principals to continue pushing and adjusting our original plan as needed. Most importantly, the cabinet is taxed with visiting classrooms with the extended cabinet to both support identified teachers and provide collective feedback to teachers of trends (or cracks in the system) as it pertains to fostering our growth in teacher collaboration and scholar achievement. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Teachers will meet in grade teams, which is a system that already exists within the school, in turn promoting trust through the collaboration towards a shared vision. Norms will be put in place to support teachers in collaborating in an open- minded manner. Team leaders will plan and facilitate PD in which team members unpack the definition of different components of the Instructional Focus . In tandem, teachers will engage in Professional Development in PLCs to come up with a shared definition of student-centered challenging tasks and lesson plans Once grade teams have established a definition, the entire staff will come together to create one cohesive and shared definition that will be used school-wide. This experience will provide opportunities to develop the trust within the staff and shared instructional vision that will build cohesion among teaching practices. PLCs will create a tennis chart or other tool used for observing the implementation of agreed upon strategies and will provide one another non-evaluative feedback using this tool. Administrators will provide coverage so that the team can engage in 3 cycles of inter-visitation before the end of March. By this time in the school year, and after all the collaborative work that has happened, inter-visitations will serve to solidify trust between teachers, because norms 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 32  have been established from the start of the school year. These walks will also help to build cohesion in instructional practices. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? We intentionally have organized all PLCs to happen in the same room simultaneously because our meeting openings and closing happen together. At the end of each meeting we collectively reflect on our pluses and deltas and make the appropriate adjustments to support our school vision. PLCs will create and revise a school-wide reflection tool to be used after intervisitation and data collection. The purpose of this is to help foster reflective practices among so that they improve their ability to self-assess and be efficacious. Since efficacy is a skill that we intend to foster in our students, it is crucial for us to support those practices in teachers. Teachers will inspire those who have trouble sharing ideas, to help all members become engulfed in the learning and collaborative process. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Data Reviewed Intent Baseline Assessments Teachers and cabinet will review data after each administration in order to adjust pacing and instruction of crucial skills connected to the CCLS. Interim Assessments Teachers and instructional cabinet will identify trends and monitor progress since the administration of the initial baselines. Disaggregated Data by student subgroup Instructional cabinet will review disaggregated scholarship data and regents completion data and isolate ENLs, SWDs, target scholars and lowest one third to determine whether or not the progress and trends observed manifest similarly in the subgroups. Teams will use any information uncovered to adjust the PD plan if necessary. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, all core departments (ELA, Math, SS, and Science) will use intervisitation to increase scholar achievement by 15% between pre and post baseline assessments that are regents and CCLS aligned. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Framework: Collaborative Teachers from 3.11 to 3.5%   Regents Completion Rate from 39.4% to 50.0% 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 33  Part 4 – Action Plan Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Grades 9-12 Framework: Collaborative Teachers from 3.11 to 3.5 August 2018- June 2019 Teacher Leaders Teachers Regents Completion Rate from 39.4% to 50.0% Instructional Cabinet Content Team leaders Common Assessments: Content team leaders will create common baselines to be administered by all teachers using the most commonly assessed standards and skills identified by the team members. This common data will allow teachers to collaborate and adjust instruction in a way that supports the achievement of our scholars Framework: Collaborative Teachers from 3.11 to 3.5 October 2018- March 2019 Content Team Leaders Instructional Cabinet Teachers Inter visitations: Teachers in a particular content area will participate in cycles of inter visitation to non-evaluatively assess the implementation of agreed upon strategies and interventions that result from our cycles of inquiry. Team leaders will provide tennis charts that the team helps to create in order to anchor reflection and debriefs in data that was observable throughout classrooms. How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in scholarship data and regents pass rates Teacher growth as measured by the tennis charts. For instance, the number of Y's observed in areas of the tennis chart should be increasing every cycle of intervisitation. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 34  4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Time line Description Personnel Responsible August 2018 Grade-specific scholar orientations were designed to coincide with August Martin Summer Institute to ensure that teachers would be present to greet parents and introduce themselves. Parents got to witness first hand the positive interactions among stakeholders. Assistant Principals, Principal, Parent coordinator September 2018 Meet the Teacher Night- will be modeled as a family dinner in which content teams will prepare a presentation and then join parents for dinner and conversations around the achievement and academic expectations of the school. Parent coordinator, instructional cabinet October 2018- June 2019 Coffee with the principal will be open to families and teachers and will serve as a time to connect, collaborate, express concerns and share expectations among different stakeholders. Parent coordinator, Principal September 2018- June 2019 SLT/ CTE/ and PTA meetings will include teachers, parents and other stakeholders. During the teacher report portion of the meeting, teacher representatives will share any relevant initiatives and updates with parents and other stakeholders. SLT chairperson, parent coordinator Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Teacher programming allows for teachers to participate in PLCs during the school day 2. Coverages to facilitate intervisitation schedules 3. Funding two teacher leaders 4. Per session for team leaders 5. Building permits to host events after school 6. Snacks and refreshments for events to which parents are invited 7. Per session for parent coordinator to invite parents to events 8. Materials- Books on PLC's, chart papers, laptops for teachers to collaborate virtually, paper Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG or SIF Grant 21st Century School Success Grant C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 35  Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Who:  All teachers attend Professional Learning Communities 6 times per week  All teams have norms and protocols set in place that were agreed upon to maximize the efficiency of collaborative time  Teachers split into contents in order to create common assessments by grade bands  Teacher engage in inter-visitations  Teacher leaders and the rest of the instructional cabinet coordinate coverage, send recap and reminder emails and debrief the inter-visitation process with teachers. When: Implementation Data Collection Periods Impact Data Collection Dates Marking Period 1: Marking Period 1: -PLC Meetings: September 5- October 19, 2018 - School-wide pre-term baseline assessment: September 19-20, 2018 Marking Period 2: PLC Meetings: October 22- November 30, 2018 - Interim assessment 1: October 15, 2018 Marking Period 2: - Interim assessment 2: November 14, 2018 -Inter-visitation Cycle 1: November 2-14 Marking Period 3: Marking Period 3: - Interim assessment 3: December 10, 2018 PLC Meetings: December 3, 2018- January 30, 2019 - School-wide post-term baseline assessment: January 16-17, 2019 - Inter-visitation 2: December 3-December 10, 2018 How:   Implementation: Team meetings will be used as a catalyst for collaborative teachers. Pedagogues meet consistently (6xper week) to discuss and flesh out or common assessments, develop common language, define shared expectations, create tennis charts for inter-visitations , and ultimately, to plan the inter-visitation schedule. Impact: Common assessment data is examined to assess the success or efficiency of common interventions, routines and strategies that have been put in place. If these are not yielding success then we adjust in real-time. As far as inter-visitations, the tennis charts are used to measure common practices across classrooms and the growth in teacher practice as it pertains to the implementation of common strategies and skills. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 36  IO assessment/ Scantron will be used to norm and monitor the performance of scholars school-wide on the common baseline assessments. In addition, content specific tennis charts will be used to measure teacher practice during inter-visitation. Part 6c. In February 2018, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 37  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? School's strengths: The School Survey and School Quality Review data sets show that parents feel that our school’s leadership has put effective systems in place to strengthen relationships between families and staff. According to the quality reviewer, School leaders strategically use effective feedback and next steps from classroom observations to support teacher development. Clear expectations and feedback to teachers are constructed using the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Additionally, feedback includes supports and resources that can be referenced in order to make the next steps even more attainable. At the onset of the school year, during Summer Institute, the principal shares the school vision with all teachers and staff, summarizes the growth and areas achieved in the previous year and sets a clear goals and direction for the year on which the community will embark. Additionally, the principal carries her vision of shared decision-making and distributive leadership through the implementation of Extended Cabinet, Town Hall Meetings, Instructional Cabinet Meetings, Attendance Team Meetings and Coffee with the Principal sessions. During the first 3 weeks of school, administrators engage in a series of instructional walk-throughs and use these to share trends, composite feedback, as well as to address any concerns that warrant immediate attention. Similarly, when visiting classrooms, administrators share instructional expectations memos with each individual teacher. The leader communicates her expectations constantly through "Friday Love" emails and by opening PLC meetings with announcements and motivational pieces. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 38  Needs and Priorities: Some of the areas that teachers and staff have identified as areas of continued improvement are providing additional support in building relationships among co-teaching partners and improved scholar outcomes on regents exams. Consequently, it is imperative that leadership support the self-efficacy of teachers in the work of using data to move their instruction and in turn move scholars. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? August Martin High School is committed to cultivating a reciprocal learning environment that will be characterized by shared decision making and leadership with a mutual accountability. Leadership will encourage and ensure opportunities for open communication and collaboration. Leadership will build an infrastructure that supports high expectations for quality instruction. School leaders will articulate a culture of high expectations and instruction that is based on scholar need. August Martin will create structures of shared leadership so all educators have an active role in determining and implementing programs and structures that will maximize student learning and development. School leaders will ensure that students have the supports to meet the culture of high expectations and be college and career ready. School leaders will support the improvement of teacher practice through structured collaborative inquiry, teacher inter-visitations, cycles of frequent observations followed up with timely feedback that is accurate and actionable. All instructional supervisors will provide models of good instruction through classroom instruction and professional development. All staff members will receive training to engage in professional conversations that are conducted in a positive entrusting environment where all are encouraged to take risks and feel comfortable addressing areas in need of growth. On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? In the 2018 - 2019 school year, I plan to focus on: Shared Decision Making Developing extended cabinet as as structure of involvement by all stakeholders. All constituency groups will be represented to reflect, assess, and share decision making on all aspects of the school community. Scholar Leadership Developing August Martin Ambassadors program as a conduit for scholar input and decisions making. The Ambassadors will will provide a scholar perspective to all aspects of the school community while also serving as student leaders. Teacher Self- Efficacy Developing teacher confidence and sense of efficacy in order to promote independent implementation of inter-visitation, data and inquiry cycles. What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? The vision for ensuring a shared understanding of August Martin's mission and instructional focus will be hedged in communication of the vision through all collaborative meetings (i.e. SLT, CET, PTA, August Martin Ambassadors, and 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 39  extended cabinet). Additionally, we will utilize summer institute to ensure that teachers are made aware of the schools mission, vision, and instructional focus by ensuring all agenda items are directly connected to the vision, mission, and instructional focus. We believe the mission, vision, and instructional focus are all living documents; therefore, we will utilize all possible collaborative opportunities to continue the refinement process and ensure buy-in. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? August Martin High School builds differentiated leadership by utilizing all stakeholders and garnering input from all constituency groups. Teacher leaders are represented in all major content areas and provide support to administration through collaboration with colleagues as: instructional Models  Mentors   Curriculum Facilitators  Professional Development Facilitators Additionally, teacher leaders meet weekly with the administrative team to review school goals and ensure alignment of all work to the vision, mission, and instructional focus of the school. Administration has pushed the evolution of distributive leadership by creating PLCs that warrant the need of: Special Education Lead  Content Leads   Grade Team Leaders  AP for All Point How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? Leadership will foster school governance through the following teams:  August Martin Extended Cabinet  Cabinet Level Inquiry Instructional Cabinet  School Leadership Team   Community Engagement Team  August Martin Ambassadors All of the aforementioned teams will target varying specific needs of the school learning community through collaboration and shared decision making. All teams will utilize open and reciprocal communication. How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy Weekly 24-48 Hours Norming, Face-to-face feedback, Inquiry 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 40  What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Teachers will review IEPs developing collaborative lessons Administrators, co-teachers Teachers will review composite feedback with next steps inter-visitations, coaches, Administrators, co-teachers Baseline Data assess the progress of scholars Administrators, Teacher leaders Advance Teacher Ratings in components 3B, 3C, 3D assess the progress of teachers in their development of rigorous instructional practices to identify areas for additional support Instructional Cabinet How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? Scholars will take grade level course sequences during their regular school day and re-take credits as needed during daily 0 period (ELT) or at the end of the day during PM school. Moreover, teachers will have professional development periods embedded into their school day where they will receive responsive and targeted support based on walk-throughs, observations and data trends. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, August Martin will increase its Regents completion rate to 50.0% through the development and implementation of a calendar of cyclical observations and learning walks and ensure all observations (both evaluative and non-evaluative) provide teachers with positive and supportive actionable feedback aligned to goals in domain 3 (components b-d ). Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve 4 year graduation rate from 73.0% to 80.0% 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 41 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers in struggling content area 4 year graduation rate from 73.0% to 80.0% September 2018- June 2019 Instructional Cabinet How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in teacher ratings under domain 3 All stakeholders 4 year graduation rate from 73.0% to 80.0% September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Parent Coordinator Attendance at family engagement events Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Cabinet Level Inquiry: The instructional cabinet along with the mathematics content lead and two scholars will identify teachers and contents in need of additional support. The target teachers from the target contents will be part of weekly classroom visits in which they receive constant non-evaluative feedback centered around the instructional focus. Coffee with the Principal: These events will take place during one Friday per month and will be an open invitation for Parents, Teachers and Staff members to spend time and build relationships with the principal. At this time the principal will make any pertinent announcements and provide updates on matters affecting the culture of the school. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 42  Extended Cabinet: Extended Cabinet is an opportunity for representatives of all constituencies in our learning community to come to together on a weekly basis to discuss issues/concerns and most importantly solutions for creating a more effective learning environment. This is also an opportunity to make shared decisions as a cabinet that support our scholars in their academic and social-emotional journey. This cabinet is an engine for change, an opportunity for voice and practice in collaboration. N/A Grades 9-12 4 year graduation rate from 73.0% to 80.0% Principal September 2018- June 2019 Team will develop initiatives that promote the instructional focus and scholar success N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Time line Description Personnel Responsible August 2018 Grade-specific scholar orientations were designed to coincide with August Martin Summer Institute to ensure that teachers would be present to greet parents and introduce themselves. Parents got to witness first hand the positive interactions among stakeholders. Assistant Principals, Principal, Parent coordinator September 2018 Meet the Teacher Night- will be modeled as a family dinner in which content teams will prepare a presentation and then join parents for dinner and conversations around the achievement and academic expectations of the school. Parent coordinator, instructional cabinet October 2018- June 2019 Coffee with the principal will be open to families and teachers and will serve as a time to connect, collaborate, express concerns and share expectations among different stakeholders. September 2018- June 2019 SLT/ CTE/ and PTA meetings will include teachers, parents and other stakeholders. During the teacher report portion of the meeting, teacher representatives will share any relevant initiatives and updates with parents and other stakeholders. SLT chairperson, parent coordinator 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 43  Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Food and refreshments for events   Per session for teachers and staff to attend extended cabinet  Coverage for teachers to attend cabinet level inquiry  Office space for meetings to take place  Books to support struggling teachers  Mailings to send families/ parents correspondence Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG or SIF Grant 21st Century School Success Grant C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Who:  All extended cabinet members are responsible for making shared decisions that will positively impact scholar outcomes  Principal and assistant principals are responsible for overseeing systems of distributive leadership and making the necessary adjustments When: Implementation Dates Impact Data Collection Dates Marking Period 1: Marking Period 1: September 5- October 19 Scholarship Data- October 25 Cabinet Level Inquiry every Wednesday period 4, Coffee with principal once per month on Friday period 7, Extended Cabinet every Monday period 0 Cabinet Level Inquiry teacher data- October 19 Marking Period 2: October 22- November 30 Cabinet Level Inquiry every Wednesday period 4, Coffee with principal once per month on Friday period 7, Extended Cabinet every Monday period 0 Marking Period 3: December 3- January 30 Marking Period 2: Cabinet Level Inquiry Teacher Data- November 28 Scholarship Data: December 5 Marking Period 3: 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 44 Cabinet Level Inquiry every Wednesday period 4, Coffee with principal once per month on Friday period 7, Extended Cabinet every Monday period 0 Cabinet Level Inquiry Teacher Data- January 15 Scholarship Data- February 2 Regents Data: January 31 Implementation: Cabinet level Inquiry will collect data about teacher practice using the four key components of rigorous tasks. Team will examine the change in rigorous task execution for particular teachers based on observations. The extended cabinet will share the decision making for several school initiatives, including budgetary decisions. Impact: Teachers who are observed during cabinet level inquiry are measured against the rigorous task framework, which gives the team a focus in terms of what to look for in quality instruction that impacts scholar outcomes. This data is reviewed alongside scholarship data. At the end of the 3rd marking period we will add the regents data and we will triangulate the 3 data sources in order to make the necessary adjustments for the next semester. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Regents exam data from January 2019. Part 6c. In February 2018, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 45  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths We strive to create a culture of inclusivity at AMHS where scholars, teachers, parents and school leaders share a voice in the decisions that are made in our learning community. This is illustrated through several of the initiatives in place for various stakeholders to come together. Weekly extended cabinet meetings, Weekly Cabinet level inquiry, monthly PTA meetings offered on a flex time schedule, SLT meetings, town halls, and Coffee with the Principal provide opportunities for teachers, students and parents to share ideas on how to improve our school and support our scholars. Supporting scholar growth and success is at the center of every decision made. Teachers along with and guidance counselor’s work in tandem with our community school organization to identify scholars in crisis and create interventions to support scholar and their families. Target groups of scholars are identified and assigned a Success mentor who monitor and support these scholars. We value the safety and well-being of all our scholars and as such we have integrated as a part of our daily curriculum an advisory program which partners with the Restorative Justice team to implement a uniform system where we are proactive rather than reactive in addressing issues, concerns or challenges that our scholars may encounter. We have made college and career readiness a priority for all our scholars. The guidance team conducts academic counseling sessions with scholars at the end of each marking period and provide guidance to scholars through the college application process. Parents are also engaged through workshops or in one-on-one sessions with the guidance 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 46  team. Parents are our partners in supporting student success. Teachers stay in contact with parents/guardians through phone calls home, Skedula (online grading system), grade team conferences and correspondences sent home. Parents are part of our SLT and are active in taking their children on college trips, joining in our community Thanksgiving celebration and attending our college fairs. A major adjustment made in strengthening the partnership with our parents involved an adjustment in PTA meeting times. In response to parent concerns about their availability to be present at meetings, we extended meeting times by hosting two sessions, an AM and a PM, for parents who had difficulty attending the PM session only. Our school culture has led to the implementation of different multiple initiatives that have stemmed from ideas form different stakeholders. Our school website, uniform options, school dances, trips and senior activities serve as examples of initiatives that demonstrate that the school leaders listen to the ideas and concerns of parents, students and teachers when making decisions for our school. The impact of our work has created a culture parents and scholars are empowered to share their opinions and take ownership of the school as an extension of home. Scholars want to come to school and parents want them with us. Teachers share in decision-making and impact decisions at the school on every level. Last school year we saw growth in the following areas: Needs: While we have created systems for families to be involved in both their child's advocacy and decision making at AMHS, we need to increase parent participation in school community events. Our highest attended event for parents last year was our Community Schools Forum, which was attended by 146 families, followed by our Spring Concert and Art Exhibition, which was attended by 79 families. This, in contrast to our highest attended PTA meeting, which was attended by 28 families, indicates a need to create additional opportunities for parents to participate in their child's authentic learning. Further, parent participation in the School Survey in the 2017-2018 school year was 56%, which reflects a need to improve communications with parents about the opportunities available at AMHS to participate in our school community so that they can better support their child's social-emotional and academic growth. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? Overarching Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties at August Martin HS: August Martin High School is committed to creating strong family and community ties through a genuine partnership grounded in the belief that parents are partners in their child's education. August Martin High School believes when educators, parents and community groups work collaboratively to support learning, students tend to stay engaged, stay in school longer, enjoy their school experience. August Martin High School has developed multiple tools for regular communication with scholars and families to foster their high expectations for student academic achievement. August Martin provides a welcoming environment for all members of our learning community, including families and visitors, by ensuring that everyone is treated respectfully and that all voices are heard. August Martin High School’s communication is reciprocal, on-going, and varied. In addition, the school leadership has ensured that there is regular communication between the school and its students and families and that this communication informs families of the high expectations for student academic achievement and social-emotional development. In order to enrich the culture of the school and advance the civic life of our school building families at AMHS will have multiple avenues to engage with the greater community to address challenges, support student development, and celebrate learning and student growth and accomplishments. In order to increase family and community engagement, August Martin High School is committed to utilizing all of the following conduits for building strong family and community relations to support scholar achievement: 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 47  ● Communication: Use of Skedula and IO Messenger to create open lines of communication between teachers and parents, use of phone messenger to share important reminders, Community Schools Forum, PTA meetings are held twice monthly (once in the morning and once in the evening), Coffee with the Principal, community celebrations/ gatherings, College Fairs ● Collaboration: Extended Cabinet, PTA, SLT, Curriculum Night, Community Schools Forum, Parent Volunteers, College Application workshops and College Planning events, Parent Consultation meetings, Parent volunteers (Our parents serve as translators and field trip chaperones; they volunteer as main office assistants and family outreach assistants) ● Support: We engage the parents in discussion about education and the steps students need to take in order to excel. The Community School Director and CCNY staff work in close collaboration with Guidance Counselors, the parent coordinator and administration to organize programs to support families in nurturing their child's social-emotional and academic growth and well-being. Programs include: mental health parent workshops, Pupil Path workshop, ELL Parent meeting, College/career Readiness Workshop, Financial Planning workshop, Parent Cooking Night, Parenting workshop, Restorative Justice workshop, mental health workshop, Immigration workshops, LGBTQ parent workshop, Defensive Driving course. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? We see families as partners in our school community. Parents share in the decision making at our school as members of SLT, PTA and Extended Cabinet. Their voices are heard during our monthly Coffee with the Principal meeting. They are active in our school, serving as volunteers and working in close collaboration with our Parent Coordinator. Our teachers utilize Skedula to keep parents informed about their child's progress, make phone calls home, and use Grade Team meetings to target scholars in need of academic and/or social-emotional support. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? Parents have opportunities to take on leadership roles through their SLT, PTA and Extended Cabinet. Elections are held annually (in June) for PTA positions. Parents and staff are elected by their own constituent groups in a fair and unbiased manner. Elections are advertised widely and open to all members of the PTA. Parent member SLT elections take place in October. All parents are invited to attend Extended Cabinet meetings. This weekly meeting provides an additional opportunity for various stakeholders (parents, scholars, teachers, CCNY staff, guidance counselors, the parent coordinator, Restorative Justice liasons and administrators) to participate in shared decision making at AMHS. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? The school will engage the community and families through community events like Open School Night, Title I Parent Consultation meeting, Community Schools Forums, Parent Teacher Conferences and workshops that support scholar social-emotional growth and well-being (See calendar below). In addition, we will host several community celebrations, including: Thanksgiving Celebration, Back to School Curriculum Night, College Information sesssions, College and Career Fairs, Parent Cooking Nights, Family Game Night, Music and Art showcases, scholar facilitated portfolio celebration, 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 48  Broadway shows, and overnight college trips. Community members and families play an integral leadership role in through PTA, extended cabinet and SLT. Our school fosters a partnership between teachers and families by including all stakeholders in Extended Cabinet, SLT and PTA meetings. Parent conferences, phone calls home and maintaining an up-to-date gradebook on Skedula enable parents and teachers to maintain contact to support scholars' academic progress. What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale Academic: -Curriculum Night -Skedula workshop -Parent Teacher Conferences -Phone Blasts -Attendance Conference -Transcript Reviews -Art and Music Exhibition -Portfolio Celebration Social-Emotional: -CCNY partnership programs -Health and Wellness center -Parent workshops -Restorative Justice Workshop College and Career Planning: -College Fairs -College Tours -Financial Aid Workshops Providing academic support and access through IO Messenger, Skedula, Curriculum Night, parent-teacher conferences, parent conferences, guidance transcript reviews provides equips parents with the ability to participate as partners in their child's education by keeping them informed of high expectations and scholar progress. Providing social-emotional support programs through our CBO partnership empowers families to help scholars navigate the challenges that arise in adolescence and focus on academic success. Providing College and Career planning programs helps families support scholars prepare for their future beyond high school graduation. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 49  -College and Career Readiness workshops How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Parents serve in leadership capacities as SLTmembers, PTAmembers, Extended Cabinet members. They are vital to increasing parent involvement and re-branding our school. They have advocated for PAL, uniforms and overnight college trips--which they volunteer to chaperone. Family partnerships with CBO: Parent volunteers are vital to our school community. They serve as translators, attend recruitment events on our school'sbehalf and volunteer their time to support clerical work. Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? N/A What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? Parent workshops 2018-2019 SY: -Parent Leadership -Skedula (Pupil Path) -College Application Process -Title I September 2018 October 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 50  2018 November 2018 Parent Consultation Meeting -Special Education (Know Your Rights) -College and Career Readiness -Child and Parent Connectedness -Parenting Workshop 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 51  December 2018 January 2019 February 2019 -Fall College Fair -Financial Planning -Parenting Workshop -CPR Training -Restorative Justice Workshop -Mental Health Parent Workshop -Diabetes and Chronic Disease 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 52  March 2019 April 2019 Workshop -Job and Career Fair -Immigration Services -Spring College Fair -6 hour Defensive Driving course -LGBTQ parent workshop May 2019 -Yoga June 2019 -Yoga 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 53  What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? We will offer a parent workshop on how to access and use Skedula to check their child's academic progress, stay in contact with teachers and support their child's academic success. In addition, attendance reports, scholarship data and transcripts will be reviewed at all meetings with guidance counselors, attendance meetings and parent intervention meetings with teachers and school administrators. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, we will increase our results from parent responses on the School Survey in "Outreach to Parents", by 1%, from a score of 3.83 to a score of 3.93 through targeted outreach initiatives in conjunction with CCNY to improve parent participation in our school community. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve 1. Through our partnership with parents, we expect to see student attendance increase to 85% by June 2019. 2. We expect to see results of the Safety Benchmark on the school survey increase by .1% on the School Survey. 3. Progress towards graduation will increase to 58.0%%. 4. College Readiness Index will increase to 30%. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 54  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Use of Phone Messenger to inform parents of important events and reminders Distributive Leadership: -SLT -PTA -Extended Cabinet Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Parents Student Attendance Progress Towards Graduation College Readiness Parents School Survey-Safety College Readiness Index September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator Phone Logs Principal Assistant Principal September 2018- June 2019 Principal CBO Director Attendance Logs College and Career Preparedness: 12th grade Parents Progress Towards Graduation September 2018-May 2019 Assistant Principals Attendance Logs -Transcript Reviews -College Fairs College Readiness -Financial Aid meetings Guidance Counselors CBO Director -College Trips N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 55  Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Space dedicated for PTA, SLT, Extended Cabinet and Parent events/workshops   Time scheduled for weekly Extended Cabinet  Releasing identified teachers to attend SLT and PTA meetings during the day  Resources allocated to support home visits  Uniforms provided to students who need it to ensure they feel part of the school community  Dedicated time in teacher schedules to attend Grade Team Meetings  Building permits to host events after school  Per session for teachers doing PM school and Regents Prep courses Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG or SIF Grant 21st Century School Success Grant C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Who: - All teachers are responsible for reaching out to parents on a consistent basis to update them on scholar progress and upcoming family engagement events - Parent coordinator is responsible for sending consistent phone blasts and reminders of important school activities such as parent workshops, gatherings, ambassador events - Scholars are responsible for bringing parents to student celebrations and events -CBO and attendance team are responsible for conducting home visits for scholars of concern -PTA is responsible for conducting parent outreach When: Implementation Dates Impact Data Collection Dates: Marking Period 1: September 5- October 19 -SLT, extended cabinets, ambassador and parent events Marking Period 2: October 22- November 30 -SLT, extended cabinets, ambassador and parent events Marking Period 3: December- January 30 Attendance at parent events and workshops; parent surveys at events Attendance at parent events and workshops; parent surveys at events Attendance at parent events and workshops; parent surveys at events 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 56  -SLT, extended cabinets, ambassador and parent events How: Implementation: feedback forms/ surveys will be administered at the conclusion of each event, including but not limited to parent workshops, ambassador celebrations, college trips etc. Impact: Impact will be measured by gauging parent satisfaction and parent feedback following the events parents attend. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will assess our progress by analyzing data from parent participation through attendance logs and tracking parent outreach. Part 6c. In February 2018, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 57  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Scholarship Rate will be 90% through targeted initiatives to improve attendance and offer programs like ELT to support scholars socially, emotionally and academically. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Each student will have an additional one hour of mandated extended learning time from Monday to Friday for the entire academic year of 2018-2019. Our ELT will occur daily, during zero period (7:27-8:13AM). ELT is scheduled into each scholar's program and meets five days a week. During ELT our scholars take the following classes: Grade 9 Restorative Justice Advisory Wellness Initiative: yoga, weight training, chess, art, music Wellness Initiative: yoga, weight training, chess, art, music College and career support (Seniors receive support in the college application process, SAT prep, college essay writing) Grade 10 Grade 11 Grade 12 Our CBO partnership with CCNY will be utilized to continue providing our students with academic, social and emotional support. We will offer Saturday School for students identified as promotion in doubt and Regents Prep classes for scholars who need additional support and tutoring. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 58  Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? For the 2018-2019 SY, ELT was restructured to take place during Zero Period, from 7:27-8:13AM. These sessions will serve as Advisory (Restorative Justice) and college preparation programs, providing targeted social, emotional and academic support. Music and art are offered, as well to allow for 10th and 11th graders to complete these credit areas in anticipation of taking on a more rigorous course load as AMHS develops its Internship and AP course offerings. This change in program was made to support increased attendance and help scholars develop an awareness of their own social, emotional and academic health. In creating this change, we hope to foster a more engaged sense of community and ownership amongst AMHS scholars by empowering them with strategies to apply when communicating, managing stress and planning for their next steps after graduation. ELT is supported primarily by CCNY staff with AMHS staff teaching advisory, art, music and gym. Community school educators who lead classes during ELT also participate in AMHS weekly PD, including Grade Team meetings as well as from CCNY. Parent outreach is conducted on an ongoing basis by CCNY staff, who also support AMHS attendance initiatives, through phone blast messenger and teacher phone calls home. Scholars are expected to attend and participate in ELT, and this message is communicated to parents via phone calls home, parent conferencing and home visits. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 59  ELT , Zero Period, has been implemented across all grades, in collaboration with our CBO, Child Center of NY (CCNY). It is overseen by both the Community School Director and the Principal. Classes offered during ELT are supported by both AMHS teachers, Restortative Justice liasons and CCNY staff. After school ELT (Regents Review and APEX courses) are offered Tuesday-Thursday and target scholars in need of credit recovery or tutoring. These classes occur during 9th period and are taught by AMHS teachers. The impact of ELT on student achievement will be assessed by credit accumulation, graduation data, Regents pass rates and school suspension data. 2018 – 2019 BELL SCHEDULE END PERIOD BEGIN 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 7:25 AM 8:13 AM 8:15 AM 9:03AM 9:06 AM 9:53 AM 9:56 AM 10:43 AM 10:46 AM 11:33 AM 11:36 AM 12:23 PM 12:26 PM 1:13 PM 1:16 PM 2:03 PM (Student Lunch) 2:06 PM 2:53 PM 2:56 PM 3:44PM Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. August 2018 ELT course offerings are solidified; interested teachers, coaches, mentors and guidance counselors are identified to teach ELT courses -Student programs reflect ELT (zero period), which begins on the second day of school September 2018 -Regents Prep/APEX classes begin September 25th -All seniors are registered for SAT administration - All seniors have completed a college essay and are working on completing college applications -All 9th and 10th graders participate in at least one RJ circle per week. October 2018 -Seniors take SATs -All Juniors and Sophomores take PSATs - All students taking APEX courses have a progress conference with classroom teachers and receive feedback on their progress November 2018 December 2019 -College Applications are submitted -Students take mock Regents (data analyzed for Regents review classes) -All seniors submit college application by Dec. 31st 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 60 -All students taking APEX courses have a progress conference with classroom teachers and receive feedback on their progress January 2019 **Apex courses end** -Regents exams -Students receive schedule with assigned with zero period courses February 2019 -Semester 2 APEX courses begin March 2019 April 2019 May 2019 -Seniors registered for March 2019 - Financial Aid Applications begin -College and Career planning -All students taking APEX courses have a progress conference with classroom teachers and receive feedback on their progress -Mock Regents exams administered (data analyzed for Regents review classes) -All students taking APEX courses have a progress conference with classroom teachers and receive feedback on their progress -SAT administration May 2019 Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program.  Books, technology and classroom resources for ELT  APEX  CCNY staff  Building permits to host events after school  Per session for teachers doing ELT, PM school (APEX Credit Recovery) and Regents Prep courses Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. X 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy Title III X Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X P/F Set-aside SIG or SIF Grant School Success Grant C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks By February 2019, 80% of scholars in all cohorts will have accumulated at least 5 credits for the 2018-2019 SY through tracking scholarship data and attendance during ELT. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 61  Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be assessed through scholarship data from marking period 1-3 in the Fall semester. Part 6c. In February 2018, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 62  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, scholar attendance will exceed the Renewal Benchmark of 81.3% and increase to 84.0% through implementation of attendance initiatives and focused intervention with chronically absent scholars. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Student Attendance: Student attendance will increase from 83% to 84% by June 2019. Regents completion rate: Regents completion rate will increase from 36.5% to 50.0% Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service whole school attendance, mental health CCNY Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community 2. 3. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 63  4. School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. The Community School will participate in the NYCDOE network as a guidance and support for Renewal Community Schools. DOE and CCNY staff will attend all mandatory meetings to establish and support the development of the Community School. CCNY is also an active member of the Mayor’s leadership committee on Community Schools and we attend those meetings on a monthly basis. CCNY director, Saran Shields is an active member of the school's SLT committee and Extended Cabinet. This forum serves as a place where all stakeholders are able to exchange ideas and discuss future initiatives which target increased parent engagement, attendance initiatives and steer the direction and vision of AMHS. CCNY plays a vital role in increasing attendance and carries out this major initiative through weekly Attendance meetings with AMHS principal, assistant principals and guidance team, communicating with parents daily regarding scholar attendance, making home visits when scholars are absent, hosting attendance initiatives and celebrations, like pizza parties for highest class attendance. CCNY's support to improve scholar attendance contributed to an increase in scholar attendance from 82% in 2016-2017, to 83% in 2017-2018. Our Scholar attendance goal for the 2018-2019 SY is 85%. In addition, CCNY staff will play a key role in AMHS Pupil Personel Teams (PPT). PPT consists of a school-based social worker, special education lead, parent coordinator, school psychologist, and Community Based Organization member ( CBO ) supporting self-contained, Integrated Co-Teaching and general education students transitioning to a least restrictive environment. The team meets weekly to address the needs of our scholars and work to individualize their August Martin academic experience. In addition, this team is responsible for monitoring tiered interventions (behavioral and academic) in order to ensure the success of of our scholars. CCNY collaborates to continue to engage parents in their student’s education. Besides monthly forums, we hosting smaller more intimate gatherings, conduct more personalized phone calls and outreach and offering a host of parent education workshops, fun family nights, entrepreneurial education services and support. We also host Adult Education workshops, like Defensive Driving and Immigration Workshops. We also have agreed to offer opportunities to parents, not just in the evenings, but in the mornings as well. Our goal is to create an active parent environment. AMHS Parent Coordinator and CCNY parent Engagement staff will meet bi-weekly to plan, reflect, strategize and celebrate the family partnership work. We will also work with teachers to support any student projects and showcases, like the Spring Music and Arts Festival, and engage parents in that way as well. We will track attendance by family and consistently evaluate our practices. We will contact parents weekly to identify successes in their student’s achievements. In addition, parents will fill out needs assessment surveys, as well as pre and post satisfaction surveys, which we will use mid-year and at the end of the year to understand the impact and needs of our parent engagement strategies. We will also engage parents through our school receivership hearing, where the public provides feedback and develops recommendations for improvement of the school. This year’s recommendations include:  Recommendation for additional advancements to the school’s vocational programs.  Recommendation for improved communication among different stakeholders. Mental health and focused student support will be provided by our mental health team which will consist of a licensed social worker and other counseling staff. Access to these services will be available to all students based on needs, referrals, walk-ins and risk assessments. Services will include the range of mental health services and also resiliency focused groups and support. Youth advocates, SWAG Mentors, will be assigned to scholars who are chronically absent to support scholars. They will track daily attendance, academic progress and the overall social/emotional needs of the students. They will develop meaningful adult-child relationships with these students. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 64  They will serve as their personal counselors and advocates to ensure their academic success and to decrease any barriers to achieving graduation outcomes. Professional development will occur monthly to understand trends, effective intervention strategies, school-wide needs and to continuously connect resources to the community school. Weekly meetings will occur with our mental health team leader, AMHS School Principal or Assistant Principals to understand the case management cases, needs and to strategize practices. Additionally, CCNY staff will particpate in AMHS Professional Development, in particular Grade Team meetings to support scholars' academic growth and strategize how to best to shape tutoring, SAT Prep and Regents Prep. Data tracking and support services for the mental health and youth advocate staff will be ongoing. Data will be tracked to understand best practices, trends, student referrals required, continued concerns and school needs. Extended learning and enrichment opportunities will be designed based on academic needs and needs assessments. Utilizing our partnerships, opportunities will be offered to assist students achieve academic outcomes and to engage in learning utilizing different strategies. Internships (NDA), Project based learning (Career Clue) and Summer Youth Employment (WIOA) are some of the strategies that will engage students in learning and supporting their academic goals beyond the classroom. Opportunities will be offered during afterschool hours and on Saturdays. Focus will continuously include enrichment activities through CCNY and school partnerships to emphasize student engagement and to combat chronic absenteeism strategies. Activities, attendance and other relevant data will continually be assessed. Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students The Community School Director will be a driving force of connectedness, resource coordination, strategic assessment and outcomes tracking at August Martin High School. By ensuring that a holistic approach toward improving academic performance is driven by strong, collaborative partnerships among the Principal, students, parents, school faculty and neighborhood stakeholders. The Director will play a valuable role in aligning positive communication, planning and resources. The Community School Director will work alongside the Principal or the Principal’s designee and the school leadership team to manage resources, service delivery and document demonstrated impact on the student based outcomes. The Director is a crucial leader in aligning resources to best meet student, family and community needs and is an essential link to bridging services, opportunities and supports that assure the success of all students attending the community school. The Community School planning team will consist of the Principal and/or her designee , the Assistant Principal, The Community School director.. We will meet each week to discuss the program’s progress, impact and areas of need. Other key Community school staff include: the Social worker, youth advocates, the Family Engagement worker, the Office Manager, counselors/interns, group leaders and the data analysis worker. Essential school staff include the Parent Coordinator, the PTA President and the school’s teaching and guidance staff. Our CBO partners include Child Center of NY and Restorative Justice. These partners will meet with our Community School Director to discuss identified survey needs and how to collaborate and coordinate services to meet those needs. We will begin to meet these community based organizations during the summer to plan enrichment services and activities to be offered beginning next Fall. Other Enrichment programs include: WIOA Learn and Earn; Neighborhood Development Area (Internship Program); August Martin Ambassadors 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 65  The ELT component of the Community School will focus on academic enrichment on Monday-Friday from 7:27-8:13AM. Through discussions with the AMHS leadership team, CCNY will support ELT services for scholars in grades 9-12, providing Wellness porgrams, SAT Prep, college essay guidance, financial aid mentoring. CCNY will hire 6 teachers to host the ELT classes. These subject areas include Weight Training, Yoga Instructor, College Prep counselors, and a Restorative Justice liason. To create the collective impact, the school will support ELT interventions for the rest of the school body. The Child Center of New York will evaluate the success of the Community School utilizing different strategies. Besides monitoring report cards, attendance data form ELT classes, enrichment and other special events, the various surveys including parent feedback, student, pre and post resiliency surveys and any other surveys conducted, the Community School team will also use narrative and reflective data to understand the school’s impact. All measurable metrics will also be assessed to understand specific goal achievement. In addition, CCNY will hire Owens Consulting as an external evaluator. Owens Consulting will assist us in developing a logic model framework that will guide our collective impact strategy and will also be used to monitor our success. Throughout the year, the Community School planning team will re-evaluate impact and strategy success at least 2-3 times during the school year. All aspects of programming will be reviewed, including mental health service, academic improvement, parent involvement, partnership development and the service learning community development. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Staffing ELT   Dedicated space for CCNY offices  Use of AMHS facilities to host community meetings, parent engagement activities and celebratory events  Efforts will continue to build the mental health program team which includes hiring a social worker and  counselors/interns to meet school needs. In addition to that we need to hire our Youth Advocacy staff and our Community School leadership team, including the Director and Assistant Director. School permits and safety for after school events   Attendance incentives, trips Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. GOAL STATUS STRATEGIES STAFF OUTCOMES TIMELINE Capture parent voice and input to ensure their voices are heard and their needs are met. In planning phase/on going Meet with Parent Coordinator to create parent survey questions Saran Shields Capture parent input September 2018 - June 2019 Develop a plan to get parents to complete and return fliers. Develop incentives for students to get the surveys back from parents. Meet weekly to discuss progress and develop and time line Improve communication Gather ideas and parents preferences Increase parent presence and participation in the school Develop Opportunities for collaboration 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 66  Attendance Outreach Provide students with social emotional support and life skills On going Ongoing Attend weekly cohort based attendance meeting 4 times a week. Conduct daily absentee calls, hold parent and student intervention meetings and conduct home visits. Implement success mentoring program for chronically absent students. Facilitate various zero period groups focused on building students connections to HS using a restorative justice model. Host various lunch groups designed to give students an outlet as well as develop their coping skills. Access to the school based wellness center and social worker. Utilizing social work interns to provide students support and case management. Member of attendance team (DOE and CBO staff) Child center of NY staff and including Child center of NY social worker Increased daily students attendance, create parental awareness of attendance issues, provide interventions for parents and students in need. Decrease the number of chronically absent students. Increase overall school attendance to 85% Increase student’s resiliency, teach students tangible coping skills, and increase attendance. Increase school spirt and positive school culture Utilize parent surveys to create parent center activities and events. Track parent attendance at events. Ensure personal calls made when hosting events or meeting. Communicate student specific information to parents in a timely matter. Utilize various More parents attend PTA meeting and events. Successful parental outreach/contact. Create authentic connections September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 -June 2019 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 67  Increase Family engagement opportunities and parent involvement by 5% Provide Academic support In Planning Phase/Ongoing methods of contact to reach parents. Conduct parent home visits when unable to reach parents. Schedule meeting and event that are convenient for majority of parents. Parent wellness workshops around psycho-education and resources. Create of resources directory Afterschool programming: NDA & WIOA programs will be made available to students who need academic support. Tutoring will be available for students in English and Math and homework help in multiple subjects. (Students will also be referred and connected to outside community resources to support their academic needs. Attend grade team meetings. Students will attend zero period classes focused on the college process. Resume development, parent workshop. Outside presenters and speaker will be used to motivate and educate students on various topics. Students will also attend a variety of college trips and fairs as well as participate in on site admissions events. Develop paid internship opportunities within the community and in school. Provides ongoing support to ensure students sustain their internship or gain non subsidized employment. Child Center of NY staff & guidance Counselor and Child Center of NY social worker Parent coordinator Child center of NY (program coordinators) between staff and parents. Increase students’ academic skills. Students can identify strategies needed to improve academically. Increase overall credit accumulation. Increase student confidence and attendance. Students will gain awareness of post-secondary options. Can apply to post-secondary options. Parent can support their child with applying and paying for college. Students have an opportunity to learn about and visit various types of colleges. Students developed work readiness skills and are employable. Students understand transferable skills. Students can gain September 2018 - June 2018 September 2018 -June 2019 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 68  College and Career Readiness Ongoing Ongoing Creation of service activities and events in and outside of school. Utilize WIOA and NDA programs’ service learning model to introduce and educated students on community and global issues. Attend all HS fairs, begin neighborhood campaigns to reintroduce the school to the community, host multiple open houses and connect with JHS serviced by the Child Center of NY through beacons and compass programs. Recruit from JHS outside of district and surrounding areas. Attend Middle school parent nights and HS events. Create opportunities for cross collaboration at various schools. Promote new school programs such as art and music. Home visits made to perspective new students Child Center of NY and Guidance counselor employment independently. September 2018 – June 2019 Students develop a sense of civic responsibility and ownership of their communities. Students get self-fulfillment completing project. Students earn service credit within their various programs. Students September 2018 - June 2018 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 69  receive increased awareness of issues affecting various community and cultures. Increased enrollment, students have an opportunity to visit the school and meet staff. JHS guidance counselors are made aware of the changes and growth of the school. Student receive warm friendly letter and home visits introducing them to their potential new school. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 70  Increased opportunities for civic engagement Ongoing September 2018-June 2019 Child Center of NY Staff and Principal Parnell 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 71  Guidance Counselor Child Center of NY staff, Deans, Teachers Support the increase of student enrollment 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 72  Ongoing Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 73  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students failing their ELAclasses or regents examinations. Students failing their math classes or regents examinations. Students failing their science classes or regents examinations. Students failing their social studies classes or regents examinations. Teacher, parent and counselor referrals, attendance, scholarship data Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Repeated classes, after school tutoring, additional regents prep Repeated classes, after school tutoring, additional regents prep Repeated classes, after school tutoring, additional regents prep Repeated classes, after school tutoring, additional regents prep Counseling, restorative justice Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group/ tutoring Small group/ tutoring Small group/ tutoring Small group/ tutoring small group/ one-one-one counseling During school day, ELTand after school (sepending on credit accumulation) During school day, ELTand after school (sepending on credit accumulation) During school day, ELTand after school (sepending on credit accumulation) During school day, ELTand after school (sepending on credit accumulation) During school day, ELTand after school (sepending on credit accumulation) 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 74  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 15 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in temporary housing will receive uniform support. Additionally, scholars will receive support for transportation. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 15 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 75  Students in temporary housing will receive uniform support. Additionally, scholars will receive support for transportation. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 1,000 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 76  Section 10: Career and Technical Education (CTE) Programs (Requirement for “Out of Time” Priority High Schools) Directions: In this section, provide a description of the Career and Technical Education (CTE) program offerings at schools in Good Standing that students in this school will have access to during the 2018-19 school year. CTE Vision August Martin is a High School in South Jamaica Queens aimed at developing well-rounded scholars and future industry leaders. We are the school where “dreams take flight.” We strive to create a learning space where our scholars are academically challenged with Common Core curricula and presented with the opportunity for a career and technical education to ready them for college and careers beyond high school. The culinary and aviation career pathways will provide students with the academic and technical preparation to pursue high-demand and high-skill careers (i.e. Product Tester, Dietetic Technician, Personal Chef, Food Inspector, Registered Dietitian, Food Journalist/Technical Writer, pilot, military, flight instructor) in related and growing industries. Knowledge and skills will be acquired through common core standard-based teaching that integrates experiential, project and work-based instruction as well as internship experiences. Culinary CTE Course Description / Grade Offering Introduction to Culinary Arts Grade 9 & Grade 10 Advanced Food Preparation Grade 11 and 12 This course will introduce scholars to food preparation basics (i.e. food storage, recipe creation, and work simplification). Scholars will be provided with the fundamental skills and knowledge needed for preparing, planning and evaluating various foods within each section of the food pyramid. Students will become familiar with how to balance a diet, how to serve food, and how to maintain a sanitary work environment. Advanced food preparation will allow our scholars who have taken the introduction course in the past an opportunity to participate in a course that goes beyond the basics. Scholars will have hands-on lab experiences students learn about professional food safety and sanitation practices, basic knife skills, a variety of cooking and baking techniques as well as professional food service procedures within the hospitality industry. Scholars will work with a variety of food products, plan balanced menus, and develop knowledge of professional cooking and baking techniques and terminology. Culinary Advisory Grade 11 and 12 Using the college board curriculum scholars scheduled for culinary will be scheduled for culinary advisory. This advisory will explore business management and the emotional resilience necessary to work and run a kitchen and how this connects to life. Aviation CTE Course Description / Grade Offering This course will introduce scholars to history of aviation. Scholars who choose to continue on this track will be scheduled tp take the following math sequence: Introduction to Aviation Grade 9 • 9th Grade Algebra I & II • 10th Grade Geometry I & II • 11th Grade Algebra/Trig I & II Aircraft Structures Grade 10 • 12th Grade Pre-Calculus This course will give scholars the opportunity to explore the mechanics of the aircraft. As part of the course scholars will complete their medical and TSA clearance at JFK and will start their flying hours at the Academy of Aviation in Farmingdale, NY. Scholars will earn 40 hours of Flight time and pass a written exam in order to get their pilots license. Preparation for this work will happen in this course. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 77  Navigation and G100 Digital Programming Grade 11 and 12 Scholars will learn about flight instruments, air craft performance and weight and balance. Further, scholars will continue their flight time and continue building towards the written exam. Hiring Considerations We will need (2) culinary teachers (1) flight teacher (1) licensed math teacher. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 78  Section 11: Professional Development Plan (Requirement for “Out of Time” Priority Schools) Directions: In this section, provide a description of the mandatory professional development that will be provided to school leadership and staff during the 2018-19 school year. Include any professional development that will occur during the summer months. Summer Institute Our Summer Institute, August 30th and 31st, centered around team building, unpacking our Instructional Objective, examining the skills embedded in the CCLS, and Data Wise (analyzing June Regents data for high frequency skills and standards to create skills focused baseline assessments). Out of building professional development included PERC training for teachers and AP Institutes for the AP Studio Art teacher and AP Environmental Science teacher. Weekly Mandatory Professional Development Day Focus Meeting Time Who's Involved Monday, Period 7 Rigorous Tasks Period 7 Facilitated by: Assistant Principal Attended by: All teachers Monday, PD Time Data Wise 2:56pm-4:00pm Tuesday ICT PD Period 7 Wednesday Grade Team Period 7 Facilitated by: Teacher Leaders, supported by Assistant Principals Attended by: Math, Science, ELA, Social Studies and Special Education Teachers Facilitated by: IEP Coordinator, supported by Assistant Principals Attended by: all teachers Facilitated by: Grade Team Leaders (teachers), supported by Assistant Principals Attended by: all teachers Thursday Friday Common Planning Time Common Planning Time Period 7 Teachers work within content teams with ICT partners Period 7 Teachers work within content teams with ICT parnters 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 79  Section 12: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment Strategies: Attendance at teacher recruitment fairs for filling potential vacancies Retention: Activities to improve school culture such as staff yoga, teacher appreciation week celebrations Assignments: Attempt to accommodate teacher preferences in a way that also supports the performance of our scholars Professional Development, Rigorous instruction PD and ICT PD based on observed areas of need. Time will be embedded in the PD calendar Support: non evaluative feedback provided to target teachers through cabinet level inquiry and inter-visitation 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development will be grounded in the implementation of AP Standards, CCSS and professional literature. Teachers will be exposed to concrete strategies that they can implement in the classroom to support rigorous instruction. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 80  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Not applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers will be part of SLT, extended cabinet, cabinet level inquiry, datawise inquiry meetings in which teachers create common assessments and norm scoring of common assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Federal Federal Federal Federal $303,214.00 $16,979 $60,180 $0 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 81  Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Local $11,200.00 TBD $2,076,821 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-2017-18 RSCEP-ON 82  quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG or SIF funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 83  Section 13: Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. August Martin High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Families of Title I Students August Martin High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 84  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parent Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA /State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 85  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) August Martin High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 86  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 87  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act ( ESSA ) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 88  ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 89  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name August Martin High School Borough Queens School Number 400 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Rory Parnell Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Manuel Guerra Teacher/Subject Area Yaritza Rodriguez Teacher/Subject Area Michelle Morales Related-Service Provider Superintendent Michael Alcoff Assistant Principal Courtnei Davis Coach type here School Counselor Ms. Velez Parent Ms. McNeil Parent Coordinator Nadege Trenard Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 352 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 90 Total number of ELLs 32 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.09%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 3 4 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At August Martin High School, we use the Fountas and Pinnell system to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. Running records are conducted once every quarter to find out the scholars' reading levels. Thus far, the data has shown that the reading levels of our ELLs range from A to T and all of them read below grade level. This data informs the instructional plan of the English, History and ENL teachers as they teach to the scholars' zone of proximal development (Vygotsky, 1978). In addition, we use MyOn as a reading tool that assesses the lexile level of our scholars. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? As a school we intend to target reading since the data has shown that it is the primary deficiency of our ELLs and it is keeping them from showing progress in the general education curriculum. As 9th graders they will have a double period of ELA in which an entire period will be dedicated to sustained silent reading. There will be explicit instruction of reading strategies that 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 91  will be supported by the ENL teacher's use of the translanguaging guide (http://www.nysieb.ws.gc.cuny.edu/files/2014/12/Translanguaging-Guide-Curr-Inst-Final-December-2014.pdf). 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of ELL programs is evaluated based on student growth as per testing data as demonstrated by Regents and/or NYSESLAT test scores, portfolio work, and other assessments. In team meetings, teachers also reflect on the curriculum, pacing, lesson plans, and teaching strategies at various points throughout the year. The content teams will be engaging in cycles of student work using "Looking for Patterns in Student Work" and the "Tuning Protocol" to monitor progress. Additionally, we will be administering the ELL periodic assessment and keeping a datafolio of it in our school domain drive. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We are using a flexible ENL instruction pacing and focusing on infusing lagging skills into that instructional pacing. ENLs are divided into 3 separate sections based on their proficiency levels on the NYSESLAT. Each tiered group will receive instruction targeting their specific needs. Moreover, the results and ENL groupings will be shared with the staff to ensure that teachers are collaborating and differentiating for ENL students based on their needs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We currently use NYSESLAT data to inform our ENL programs and instructional decisions. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We use our Monday afternoon PDs to share data and disseminate information. We make instructional and curricular adjustments through the Datawise inquiry process. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The standalone ENL program consist of three groups. The first is for scholars who are SIFE and Entering, next our Emerging and Expanding, and lastly one group for the Transitioning and Former ELL population. The classes are held daily for a primarily homogeneous population (in terms of L2 acquisition). b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 92  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As mandated in the New York State CR Part 154, the Entering and Emerging ELLs receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction every week, Transitioning and Expanding ELLs are provided with 180 minutes per week of ENL instruction, and Commanding ELLS are provided with 90 minutes every week for two additional years after testing out. The mandated number of instructional minutes is provided by the ENL or bilingual ELA teacher. The organization of staff in the program model described in the previous section ensures that the mandated instructional minutes is provided according to the proficiency levels. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area teachers provide grade-level academic work in the student’s native language so that the student maintains academic progress, as well as English to develop academic English language. Furthermore, teachers regularly review student performance data and design units of study that meet the diverse needs of students and target grade-level course standards. In all core subject areas, teachers use a variety of scaffolding and ESL instructional strategies when teaching ELLs. Furthermore, resources used correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? All State tests are provided in the students' home language based on student preference and proficiency in the L1. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. SIFE- Students with interrupted formal education (SIFE) receive additional instructional time during the regular school day through ELT. They are enrolled in classes where they can work on basic skills for whichever content area they struggle with most. B. Newcomer- The newcomers (ELLs who have been receiving ESL instruction for no more than 3 years) receive intensive targeted instruction in reading, writing, speaking, and listening in small group settings. This targeted instruction ensures that the ELLs quickly achieve the state-designated grade-level of English-language proficiency. C. Developing-We work with this group of ELLs to improve their English-language skills in all areas, most specifically in reading and writing (areas that this group finds the most challenging according to NYSESLAT data). As a result, they receive targeted instruction in reading and writing with the Milestones curriculum. D. Long Term- The goal for our long-term ELLs (ELLs who have been receiving ESL instruction for at least 6 years) is to reach English-language proficiency by the end of the school year. Instruction is driven by the scholars’ NYSESLAT scores and thus catered to their language needs. Therefore, they receive intensive targeted instruction in reading, writing, speaking, and listening in small group settings, as well as instruction that prepares them for the NYSESLAT. This targeted instruction ensures that the ELLs quickly achieve the state-designated grade-level of English-language proficiency. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs identified as students with disabilities receive ENL class as well as the instructional strategies necessary to give them access to the general education curriculum all the while making strides in filling in the gaps in academic knowledge. Moreover, the Child Center of NY tutoring program provides additional academic support three times per week. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 93  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The IEP goals and English proficiency of ELL-SWDs are attained within the least-restrictive environment recommended on the IEP by way of instructional differentiation techniques, strategies, and activities. Each content area's curriculum map includes a variety of ELL and SWD specific resources in order to provide multiple entry points to struggling students. Scheduling for push-in and pull-out ESL services for ELL-SWDs will be adjusted throughout the school year based on individual student or small group needs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention programs have been implemented at August Martin High School for ELLs in English-language development, Math and ELA/Humanities. All supplemental services and programs are funded by the school budget, Title III, and other grants. The targeted intervention programs for ELLS in ELA and math include Targeted Instruction. Additionally, an after school interventions program is offered that targets ELL students for regents readiness. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year, our goal is to certify all teachers are knowledgeable in ENL strategies. Additionally, we would like our staff to be knowledgeable of ESL teaching strategies. As such, we will provide them opportunities to attend professional development focused on this topic. We would like to provide more enrichment programs to our ELLs and their families. We are planning to start a language enrichment program, in which ELLs can participate along side their parents/guardians. Furthermore, we would like to start a program that can assist newcomers in becoming acclimated to New York City. Lastly, we plan to improve our technology program with language relevant software, which will enrich language instruction for all our ELLs. This software includes Rosetta Stone and audio books. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this time, we are not planning to discontinue any programs or services for ELLs. We feel that our current programs benefit our students, and they simply have to be improved for full efficiency. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs during and after the school day. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The English-language programs use the Access Newcomers curriculum, Engage NY curriculum, and New Visions curriculum. These curricula provide standards-based instruction in reading, writing, listening, and speaking, and it is designed to accelerate the language and literacy growth of ELLs. Technology materials used with the ELL student population include Learning Village, Study Island, audio books, and the SmartBoard. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language arts development accelerates the literacy gains in both the native language and English, validates the prior knowledge students bring, and bolsters self-esteem. Native language support includes bilingual dictionaries, native language classroom libraries, technology enrichments in the native language, and the buddy system. These resources are available in most classrooms to accelerate learning. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We use materials and services that are appropriate to our students' grade and age. For example, students who require support in reading comprehension and phonics are provided with support with the Access Newcomers curriculum. Students 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 94  who need additional writing support are provided with graphic organizers that scaffold the writing process and various writing products, including the five-paragraph essay. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The English-language programs use the Access Newcomers curriculum, Engage NY curriculum, and New Visions curriculum. These curriculums provide standards-based instruction in reading, writing, listening, and speaking, and it is designed to accelerate the language and literacy growth of ELLs. Technology materials used with the ELL student population include Learning Village, Study Island, audio books, and the SmartBoard. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We have a summer bridge program, facilitated by several members of the faculty and staff, that assists newly enrolled 9th grade ELLs in getting ready for high school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer scholars Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? As part of the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at August Martin High School, an ENL/literacy consultant will provide monthly workshops that relate strategies and techniques in teaching ELLs. Additionally, the ENL teacher will attend ELL liaison meetings that are facilitated by the network. The ENL teacher will also facilitate several Professional Development sessions for teachers of ELLs and related service providers, and they are outlined below: TOPIC EXPECTED DATE TARGET AUDIENCE ESL strategies in the mainstream classroom October 2017 Teachers, paraprofessionals, related service providers, administration, guidance counselor, parent coordinators, and psychologist. How to teach vocabulary to ELLs December 2017 Teachers, paraprofessionals, related service providers, administration, guidance counselor, parent coordinators, and psychologist. ELL identification process February 2018 Teachers, paraprofessionals, related service providers, administration, guidance counselor, and parent coordinator. Strategies for Struggling Readers April 2018 Teachers, paraprofessionals, related service providers, administration, guidance counselor, and parent coordinator. Language Acquisition Models June 2018 Teachers, paraprofessionals, related service providers, administration, guidance counselor, and parent coordinator. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 95  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Monthly professional development workshops and assistance from the ENL teacher will provide support to the staff as they assist ELLs in their transition from middle school to high school. The sessions outlined above will assist teachers in receiving ELL-specific professional development for 15% of total PD hours (for all teachers), or 50% (for Bilingual/ENL teachers). The ENL Coordinator keeps records of ELL training attended by staff inside and outside the school. The records include sign-in sheets and agendas, and they are kept in the school’s ELL Compliance Binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? From April to June, the members of the LPT will schedule annual individual meetings with the parents of ELL students in order to discuss the student's language goals, progress, needs, and assessment results. Spanish interpretation/translations will be provided in-house by staff. For home languages other than Spanish, interpretation/translation services will be provided by the school's outside vendor. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. I. PARENTAL INVOLVEMENT ACTIVITIES >>>FALL<<< PTA meetings SLT meetings Thanksgiving Feast >>>WINTER<<< PTA meetings SLT meetings ELL Parent Orientation ELL Parent Workshop: How to Foster English-language Development at Home >>>SPRING<<< PTA meetings SLT meetings ELL Parent Orientation ELL Parent Workshop: ELLs and Test-taking Strategies Mother's Day Brunch >>>SUMMER<<< Principals Brunch PTA meetings SLT meetings ELL Parent Orientation Father's Day Hoops 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 96  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 97 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Rory Parnell, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 98  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: August Martin High School School DBN: 27Q400 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Rory Parnell Title Principal Courtnei Davis Assistant Principal Nadege Trenard Parent Coordinator Manuel Guerra ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms. McNeil Parent Yaritza Rodriguez Teacher/Subject Area Michelle Morales Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Ms. Velez School Counselor Michael Alcoff Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/19/17 6/19/17 6/19/17 6/19/17 6/19/17 6/19/17 6/19/17 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 99  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q400 School Name: August Martin Superintendent: Mr. Alcoff The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Courtnei Davis Assistant Principal * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We utilize the Home Language Information Survey, ATS, and Blue Card information to identify the translation and interpretation needs of our community, as well as informal data from one on one conversations between parents, teachers, and the Parent Coordinator. Based on the HLIS and ATS, our school population contains households who speak: Bengali, Haitian Creole, French, and Spanish. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 100 Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Bengali Spanish Hatian Creole French 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Announcements regarding significant attendance or non-attendance dates or changes in schedule, i.e. half-days, holidays, NYS testing dates, etc. Letters from the principal regarding disciplinary code, building infrastructure issues, new initiatives, etc. ELL and SPED compliance correspondence, After school program information. Quarterly syllabi for ELA, Math, and Science. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 101  Permission slips for all activities Parent-teacher conference announcements. All other school to parent correspondence. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Curriculum night- September Parent Teacher conferences- November, March, May Parental Engagement Workshops- Monthly. Phone calls- As required, from the attendance teacher, guidance counselor, classroom teacher, dean, and administrators. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In efforts to reach families that cannot communicate in English, the school utilizes all resources available which include staff members, who speak those languages and are able to serve as translators. Additionally, Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 102  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All parental notification translation and interpretation needs for the APR community are met in-house or through the Translation and Interpretation Unit. All correspondence and announcements are translated in-house by school staff into Spanish, Hatian Creole, and French. Other translations are requested from the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? A survey is made available to parents throught the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit to assess whether or not they are being communicated with effectively in their language of preference. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 103 
