 09X022 School Name: J.H.S. 022 JORDAN L. MOTT Principal: EDGAR LIN 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Jordan L. Mott Junior High School 09X022 320900010022 6-8 School Number (DBN): 270 E. 167 th Street, Bronx, New York 104456 718.681.6850 Phone Number: Brandy Franklin bfranklin@schools.nyc.gov Fax: Email Address: School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Sheltering Arms Edgar Lin Rosa Taveras Conor Callagy OlimpiaDiaz Conor Callagy Yaneris Martinez NA NA District Information Geographical District: 09 Leticia Rosario Superintendent: 1245 Washington Ave, Bronx NY 10456 Superintendent’s Office Address: LRosario2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718.579.7143 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Ave, Bronx NY JRuiz@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718.828.2440 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. School Receivership In April 2015, state lawmakers and Governor Andrew Cuomo created section 211-f of the State Education Law, which established the School Receivership program as a new intervention strategy to turn around struggling schools. This new law, and Commissioner’s regulation 100.19, requires that “Persistently Struggling Schools,” defined as Priority Schools that have been in the most severe accountability status since the 2006-07 school year, be given an initial one or two-year period under a “Superintendent Receiver”. These schools were placed in receivership under the New York City Schools Chancellor. Each school must make demonstrable improvement on specific benchmarks or it will be placed under an independent receiver. Under the Chancellor’s Receivership Plan, the School Renewal Program is NYCDOE’s 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 5  core strategy for turning around struggling schools. Renewal Schools have already begun implementing significant interventions and are receiving additional resources and support to accelerate student performance and help close achievement gaps reflected in this RSCEP. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 6  The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 7  School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 8  Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Edgar Lin Conor Callagy OlimpiaDiaz Suleika Arjona Yaneris Martinez Rosa Taveras Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 10 Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Whitney Ford/Staff AnallelyHerrera/Parent Ana Rivas/Parent Elizabeth Miranda/Parent Represented Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Community Engagement Team (CET) Signature Page Directions: Please fill out this form and indicate members of your Community Engagement Team. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each Community Engagement Team member in the first column. 2. Record the position and constituent group represented in the second column. 3. Community Engagement Team members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If a Community Engagement Team member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original signature page. Name Position and Constituent Group Edgar Lin Brandy Franklin Rosa Taveras 2018-19 RSCEP-PF Represented Principal Assistant Principal Community School Director Signature (Blue Ink) 11  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Karen Wynne HerenPereyra OlimpiaDiaz YadritzaRodriguez Sheltering Arms Teacher Parent/PTAPresident Parent Coordinator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 12  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. MS 22X is located in the Morrisania area of the Bronx which is consistently identified as one of the poorest communities in the nation and has one of the highest crime rates nationally as well. During the first part of our strategic plan, we worked to improve the safety and tone of the school. Systems and structures were implemented and embedded so that all students, staff and parents understand the expectations and, as a result, there have been marked improvements. Additionally, all staff has been trained in PBIS protocols as well as TCI and Restorative Circles. The implementation of these strategies has had an observable and measurable positive effect on the school culture. To date, incidents and suspensions have been drastically reduced. Additionally, these systems and strategies have positively impacted the school wide perception of safety which has contributed to a marked increase in attendance. We expect continued improvement in these areas in order to create the positive culture for learning that is our goal. The school’s mission is to ensure high level learning for all. Additionally, we believe that it is imperative to create an environment that conveys high expectations and offers opportunities to our youngsters. In order to accomplish this, we have engaged in several partnerships designed to help us build our internal capacities. We have partnered with Teachers College to provide professional support to faculty in the areas of reading instruction; additionally, we are working with Teachers College Writing Project. We are linked with Teaching Matters to provide coaching support in math, ELA, Science and Social Studies as well as for teacher leadership development. For additional coaching for teachers, we are engaged with Math Solutions as well as G&R Inclusive Group. MS 22X has collaborated with R-BERN at Fordham University for support for teachers who instruct English Language Learners. The Learning through Expanded Arts Program (LEAP) has provided enrichment activities for our students and recently, through the Community Schools Initiative, we have initiated a partnership with Sheltering Arms, which will provide our students with social/emotional programs and supports as well as additional resources for academic interventions. At Jordan L. Mott, we believe that students learn best when they are able to make meaning of and take responsibility for their learning – they know what they are learning, how they are going to learn it, where they currently are in their learning and what they need to do to fill the gaps in their learning. We believe that students learn best when there are clear and appropriate behavioral and academic expectations for their learning, which will lead to success. We also believe that students learn best when they build strong relationships with adults and one another and become better aware of their emotions. Based on those beliefs, our priority statement for 2018-19 is Working together to ensure all learners are able to make-meaning of and take responsibility for their learning. The community is composed largely of Latino, African American and, most recently, West African families. The student population includes 40% English Language Learners (ELLs) and 22% Students with Disabilities (SWDs). Both special populations require additional supports and targeted instruction to meet their needs. Our ELLs are receiving specific English as a Second Language instruction and strategies and all teachers are meeting their learning needs by explicitly teaching vocabulary across content areas. Our SWDs are receiving appropriate academic and 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 13  behavioral supports which include scaffolding their learning, to ensure that they have access to and success with the school curriculum. We have made great progress in several elements of the Capacity Framework. As indicated above, there have been drastic reductions in the numbers of incidents and suspensions while attendance has increased. Teachers and students now report feeling safe and supported and a culture for learning has been established. Progress has been made in the Element: Collaborative Teachers. Teachers have demonstrated that they are committed to increasing student outcomes. They have consistently meet in both content and grade teams to plan and adjust curriculum and have engaged in inquiry around problems of practice based on analysis of student work and assessment data, often using professional texts and other resources. Their collaborative work has resulted in a consistently implemented curriculum across classrooms that have resulted in improved instruction and student achievement. There has been enormous progress made in the Element: Effective School Leadership. On a recent survey, teachers agreed that the principal cares about his faculty and students and provides supports to them in many ways. As a result of the systems and structures put in place by the principal, teachers have been supported by providing them with the opportunities for professional learning that have moved to improve their practice . They have been given a voice in decisions affecting all aspects of the school and teacher leaders have been nurtured and developed. The principal also sets high standards for teacher/staff performance and for accountability. Students have benefited from the training of staff and from the behavioral and procedural systems implemented, such as PBIS and Advisory. There has been great progress and improvement in the Element: Trust as demonstrated by the collaborative nature of the staff, the respect shown to students, the willingness of faculty to support and share responsibility/accountability with administrators and the attendance at school wide functions to which parents are invited. With the development of trust, the school has made progress in the area of family and community partner engagement. More than 75% of parents have attended curriculum nights, family nights and caregiver conferences. Recently parents and community came out to celebrate MS 22 Day. The Element that has presented the greatest challenge is: Rigorous Instruction. While there have been observable improvements in teaching practice, the consistent impact on student performance has not yet been realized. Recent data indicate that student proficiency performance in ELA and mathematics has significantly increased. However, proficiency still lags behind district and city averages. As indicated above, we have partnered with LEAP to provide extended day enrichment services to our students. Students have participated in sports, theater and dance programs throughout the year. LEAP has operated independently but has been collaborative and supportive in all things requested. Although our past extended learning opportunities have been those described above, our recent selection of Sheltering Arms as our Community School CBO promises to provide opportunities for extended learning time in both academic support as well as enrichment. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X022 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 444 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 42 41 9 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 15 13 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 98.0% % Attendance Rate 97.3% % Reduced Lunch 35.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 75.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.58 8% 35% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 18.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A YSH YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A 62 62 3 92.3% 0.5% 23.6% 20.7% 1.4% 0.5% 4 33% 5.7 12.1% 24% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO YES N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 15  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? School Strengths: ● Our faculty are committed to providing high-level (grade-level and beyond) learning experiences for our students ● Faculty holds a strong collaborative culture through organizing structure of teams. School Needs: ● NYS ELA and Math Exam data indicates that few students are performing at or above grade level, yet core course pass rate for ELA and Mathematics remains high. This indicates a lack of rigor in learning expectations and a disconnect between what, as a school, we want students to learn and what grade-level learning represents . ● Refining and adjusting CCLS-aligned curricula across content areas to ensure rigor and multiple-entry points for all students. ● Implementation of systematic approach to academic interventions to ensure all student are on pace to meet high-level learning targets. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 17  What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? CCLS-aligned curricula will be implemented across all content areas: Expeditionary Learning for ELA, CMP3 for mathematics. Curricula will be scaffolded for all students via multiple entry points of process, product, and/or content. Instructional shifts will be evident in teacher practice as well as student talk and writing samples across all content areas. Expanded learning time will provide opportunities to answer two PLC questions – What will we do when kids don’t learn and What will we do when kids do learn? ELT will provide interventions and enrichment opportunities aligned to tier 1 instruction that will ensure student standard mastery. At 09X022, teaching practices align to 22’s 22 – a set of fundamental instructional must have’s and must do’s that align with the Danielson Framework for Teaching (see below). DOMAIN 1: High-level learning occurs when we PLAN and... 1. Learning/Language Objectives meet the 22 way when they… o begin with “We will be able to...” (WWBAT) o are posted throughout the duration of the lesson o are derived from CCLS essential standards o describe specifically what students are expected to know and be able to do by the end of the period o include academic vocabulary ( Depth Of Knowledge Levels 2-4; 22’s Tier 2 ) o include the process by which students will reach LO 2. Lesson plans for all subjects include: o Learning Objectives o Anticipatory Set /Do Now o higher order questions & activities (DOK aligned)* o a logical progression of activities leading to demonstrating mastery of the LO o Kagan Structure o multiple-entry points (process/product/content)* o Purposeful groupings based on assessment data o a closure with an opportunity for student reflection 3. Learning Objectives progress toward mastery of essential standards 4. There is evidence that assessments informed planning DOMAIN 2: High-level learning occurs when our LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS have... 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 18  0. Teachers who greet and welcome students from the doorway as they enter 1. Unit-appropriate Tier 2 and Tier 3 Word Wall accessible to students 2. Posted student work, within the current unit, with actionable feedback aligned to a rubric 3. Current unit artifacts of teaching and learning on the walls or bulletin boards 4. RORS behavior expectations posted and reinforced (as necessary) during the lesson 5. Lesson plans available in digital or hard copy during the lesson 6. Routines for safe and fast student movement and transitions (need exit routine posted) 7. Student work organized by unit and/or standard in portfolios 8. Teachers monitor and track student progress towards RORS. o track RORS  following routines (entry routines/learning routines/exit routines)  classroom behavior  attendance DOMAIN 3: High-level learning occurs during INSTRUCTION when... 0. Teacher facilitates the unpacking of Learning Objective resulting in: o students being able to express in their own words what they’re learning and why they’re learning it o how it fits within unit goal 1. There is an activity for students to do when they enter that connects to the day’s learning or meets student needs 2. There is a closure activity to reflect on progress toward the LO based on the lesson’s work 3. Meaning-making or text-reading occurs in every period. There is a routinized annotation/coding process 4. Students interact purposefully using a Kagan structure in every lesson 5. There are at least 3 DOK Level 2-4 (higher order) questions/prompts o Teacher provides wait time for thoughtful responses and encourages extension 6. Multiple entry points aligned to the Learning Objective 7. In every classroom, faculty will provide feedback to student responses to initiated questions (IRF vs. IRE). In every classroom, teachers will use Accountable Talk stems to facilitate students’ extension and enrichment of discussions that invite comments from their classmates and challenge one another’s thinking. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 19  Multiple entry points to ensure success for all students are provided via either process, product and/or content. Consistency is supported through school-wide commitment to 22’s 22 and monitoring. Across all content areas, common formative assessments will be refined and data will be collected and analyzed by classroom teacher, teams, and instructional coaches/supervisors to ensure course corrections in pedagogy and content to ensure high-level student learning. In two years, 09x022 expects it’s Performance Index in ELA to be 57 and 51 in math. An increase of 14% and 26% respectively. What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? Through a collaborative process, CCLS-aligned curricula will be continually revised based on observed student need and assessment data to meet the needs of diverse learners - personally, academically, and culturally. What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? 09X022 will continually build and work towards diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skill, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready. Instructional shifts are foundational to support and ensure that students develop the aforementioned skills, habits and behaviors. What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? Delivery of instruction aligns to 22's 22 fundamental practices that align with the Danielson Framework for Teaching. How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? Teacher will embed the three principals of multiple entry points aligned to Universal Design for Learning in daily lesson plans and delivery. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? 09X022 will continue to deepen our standards-based diagnostic and proficiency learning and data analysis cycles to include benchmarking to ensure that progress towards standard mastery. Use of assessment data will continuously drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that best support and ensure student outcomes. Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) iReady Benchmark, summative School created diagnostic, formative 6-8 6-8 Part 3 – Annual Goal Benchmarking to determine progress Diagnostic and formative to determine instructional/curricular next steps and intervention/enrichment needs Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 20 expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, across all content areas, teachers will have clear criteria for success to measure student learning with strategic checks for understanding at key lesson points and will deliver actionable feedback using collaboratively-refined culturally responsive standards-based curricula resulting in equitably rigorous instruction for all students. The result will be an increased ELA proficiency rating from 19% to 25% and increased Math proficiency rating from 12% to 20% as evidenced on the New York State assessments. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? 09X022 believes the following Renewal Benchmarks will improve by meeting Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Rigorous Instruction; Collaborative Teachers; Average Math Proficiency Rating; Performance Index on State Math Exam; Performance Index on State ELA Exam 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 21 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Formative standards based assessments (Diagnostic/ Proficiency assessments, etc...) Content faculty, grade level teams, content area supervisors, and coaches, ELA and Math consultants. Content areas teachers Collaborative Teachers June 2018 – September 2019 Content faculty, grade level teams, content area supervisors, and coaches, ELA and Math consultants. Monthly, Sept. 2018 – June 2019 content supervisors, TMI coaches, Learner Centered Initiatives, Metamorphosis. ADVANCE and coaching data Collaborative Teachers; Average Math Proficiency Rating; Performance Index on State Math Exam; Performance Index on State ELA Exam Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Disaggregate NYS ELA and Math data and review current CCLS-aligned curricula to determine gaps, and adjust to meet the needs of our student population and our school instructional focus Ongoing professional development and in classroom support for teaching reading and vocabulary strategies and math Common Core shifts to support instruction in all content areas with support from District 9 Initiatives (5 Practices, QTEL, SDI). Ongoing targeted professional development will be provided to support teachers in learning new strategies for checking for understanding and creating multiple entry points to enable students access to learning during instruction (aligned to Danielson 3d). All teachers Rigorous instruction Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, coaches, teachers leaders and teachers ADVANCE and coaching data, teacher surveys (plus and deltas) Formative standards based assessments (Diagnostic/ Proficiency 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 22  Hire additional ENL and SPED certified teachers to provide additional and more individualized support for MLLs and SWDs in core content classes to ensure that they have the ability to access the curriculum and benefit from rigorous instruction Collaborative team meetings based on supportive, trusting relationships among teachers, coaches and supervisors are scheduled into every teacher’s schedule for the revision and creation of pacing calendars, units of study, and common formative assessment based on assessment data derived from checks for understanding and criteria for success. In PLCs, collaborative teacher teams monitor results of common formative assessments to chart growth and impact of targeted strategies for checks for understanding during instruction and progress toward mastery of CCLS and content standards to support each other in adjusting curricula, units of study and or lessons as appropriate. MLL and SWD students Rigorous Instruction: Average Math Proficiency Rating; Performance Index on State Math Exam; Performance Index on State ELA Exam Sept 2018 - June 2019 MLL & SWD Teachers, Assistant Principal, Principal Content teacher teams Collaborative Teachers Weekly, Sept. 2018- Jun. 2019 Content area coaches, supervisors, principal. TMI Consultants, BFSC ELA, Math, and Social Studies supports Content area teacher teams Average Math Proficiency Rating; Performance Index on State Math Exam; Performance Index on State ELA Exam 6 times yearly, Sept. 2018 - Jun. 2019 Content coaches and supervisory, TMI coaches, West Ed, Learner Centered Initiatives, Metamorphosis, District 9 initiatives (5 Practices, QTEL, SDI, TCIS, Teacher Rounds and CRE) assessments, etc...) Formative standards based assessments (Diagnostic/ Proficiency assessments, etc...) Team meeting agendas, notes, etc... Formative standards based assessments (Diagnostic/ Proficiency assessments, etc...) Ready paper and pencil data Formative standards based assessments (Diagnostic/ Proficiency assessments, etc...) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 23  Prepare students for admission to Specialized High Schools by offering Saturday Prep classes Identified 7th graders Rigorous Instruction: Average Math Proficiency Rating; Performance Index on State Math Exam; Performance Index on State ELA Exam 4b – Parent and Family Engagement February 2019 - May 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Kaplan instructors Kaplan formative assessments and progress monitoring How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School will engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home by conducting monthly Caregiver Learning Walks through classrooms and workshops. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. The school will utilize funding from their Persistently Struggling Schools Grant (PSSG) along with other funding sources to expand the use of critical resources. The following resources will be leveraged in order to deepen our work and better support achievement of our rigorous instruction goal: Increased hiring of pedagogical staff to ensure true teaming.   Additional SPED and ESL faculty to ensure all students needs are met, including SWDs and ELLs.  PSSG Funding for Expanded Learning Time and Teacher Team trainings  Per Diem Substitutes  CCLS aligned curricula  Engage NY resources  Curriculum coaches and Instructional Coaches (from PSSG vendors Teaching Matters, Metamorphosis, Learner Centered Initiatives, West Ed) Supplemental Textbooks from PSSG vendor Saddleback   Community Schools CBO support  Teach Like a Champion Uncommon Schools Off-site PD    BioBus Visitations SBO selection of Option 1 to allow for continuous planning of Professional Development across the school Lakeshore Learning Supplies & Professional Development Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School X Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 24  Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During January 2019, teacher observation data will indicate 30% improvement in number of teachers rated Effective or above in Danielson 3d. Formative assessment data indicate progress of a minimum of 3% in ELA and 4% in math. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ADVANCE, internal coaching data, Formative standards based assessments (Diagnostic/ Proficiency assessments, etc...) Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 5.3 2014 SDE Review Finding (IIT) While school leaders have implemented systems and informal practices to address the physical safety and the social and emotional development health of all students, there is limited evidence that there is any clear and consistent structure that supports an intellectually safe learning environment that would nurture academic and social success for all sub-groups of students. School Strengths: ● Collaborative Teachers ● Strong system of student support (dean and guidance counselor staffed in every grade). ● Professional development in Restorative practices, TCIS, and LSCI. School Needs: ● Continue building of teacher capacity to support student social and emotional developmental health. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 26  Institute a research-based program school wide that supports positive behavior and that will create the conditions for academic success. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? The vision of 09X022 works to ensure a safe and supportive culture of learning where adults believe that kids can learn and all children will learn because of what we do. All stakeholders describe 09X022 as a place where all constituents work to ensure high-level student learning for all. CBO partners provide supports that work to remove all barriers to student learning, including social and emotion growth and health of our students. Student voice and leadership is supported via a formal advisory structure as well as formal student government where students play an important role in school-wide decisions. In addition, one eighth and one seventh grade student will be included in the SLT. 09X022 has adopted the PBIS framework to support social-emotional learning. We also work incorporate Restorative practices as well as working to ensure that 100% of faculty and staff are trained in Life-Space Crises Intervention techniques. 09X022 believes in preventative measures and frequent data monitoring to improve student social-emotional skills. Faculty will track behavioral data daily and engage in inquiry cycles to support improved student social-emotional skills. Counseling services are provided as a result of identified needs based on data and findings of the inquiry cycles. School guidance counselors have developed a social-emotional learning framework and continuum based on CASEL. Students and faculty will be surveyed 3 times to determine growth. Data will also indicate improvements in student social emotional learning. 09X022 believes in preventative measures and frequent data monitoring to improve student social-emotional skills. Faculty will track behavioral data daily and engage in inquiry cycles to support improved student social-emotional skills. CBO and other service providers will be included in all inquiry team cycles and discussion. Attendance and chronic absenteeism will improve via a intentional system of data collection and monitoring. Students with patterns of chronic absences will be identified and assigned an attendance mentor. Attendance mentors will track student attendance, outreach to families and CBOs, and coordinate supports needed to ensure student attendance in school. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner CBO Focus Sheltering Arms Social-emotional and academic supports How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? Through strategic planning, 09X022 will partner with CBO to create supportive environment and engagement for student families. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 27  By June 2019, CHAMPS (Conversation/Help/Activity/Movement/Participation/Success) Classroom Management protocols and PBIS Foundations will be implemented school-wide, resulting in a decrease in chronic absenteeism of 2% or more (currently 20.9%), average daily attendance will meet or exceed 91%. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? 09X022 believes the following Renewal Benchmarks will improve by meeting the Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Rigorous Instruction; Collaborative Teachers; Average Math Proficiency Rating; Performance Index on State Math Exam; Performance Index on State ELA Exam; Attendance 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 28  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Implement professional development on PBIS (Positive Behavioral Intervention and Supports) for all staff at for consistency, coherence and positive approaches to student behavior incorporating District 9 TCIS & CRE initiatives. Establish PBIS committee (including all constituents) to create the school based structures, common behavioral expectations , rituals and routines to be implemented by all staff (including kick-off’s, incentives, celebrations, recognitions, etc Refine the school ladder of referral that aligns with PBIS and Restorative Justice Framework and disseminate information Administrators and key committee members monitor staff for fidelity of implementation and consistency throughout the school/building Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Staff Attendance August 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals, Grade team leaders, CBO support personnel, PBIS Committee, Safe & Civil Schools Consultants. How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Attendance data All faculty and Staff Attendance September 2018 – June 2019 Assistant Principals, Grade team leaders, CBO support personnel, PBIS Committee Team meeting agenda and notes All Staff All Staff Average Math Proficiency Rating; Performance Index on State Math Exam; Performance Index on State ELA Exam Average Math Proficiency Rating; Performance Index on State Math Exam; Performance Index on State ELA Exam January – June 2019 Assistant Principals, Grade team leaders, CBO support personnel, PBIS Committee OORS reports January – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal OORS reports Attendance data 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 29  4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. School will engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child by conducting monthly Learning Walks through classrooms and workshops. Administration team, school counselors and CBO staff will be responsible Implementation and oversight. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school will utilize funding from their Persistently Struggling Schools Grant (PSSG) along with other funding sources to expand the use of critical resources. The following resources will be leveraged in order to deepen our work and better support achievement of our supportive environment goal:  Youth development coaches   PSSG Funding for Expanded Learning Time (Teacher Per Session, Guidance Counselor Per Session, Para. Per Instructional Coaches from TMI Session)  Per Diem Substitutes  PSSG Vendors: West Ed; Learning through an Expanded Arts Program (LEAP); Kaplan K12 Learning Services; Brienza’s Academic Advantage; Wellness in the Schools; Children Achieving Results Effectively (CARE); Goldmansour & Rutherford Lakeshore Learning Professional Development   The Leadership Program   Orton-Gillingham Professional Development on multi-sensory strategies Supplemental texts from Sharzer Associates Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School X Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. November 2018 – examine incident and suspension data for 5% reduction December 2018-analyze attendance data for 20% improvement for chronic absentees January 2019- review referral data to determine 100% adherence to referral procedures 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 30  During February 2019 progress toward 100% fidelity of implementation of pbis will be determined January 2019-monitor incident data for 5% reduction in level 5 and 5 occurrences January 2019 – monitor incident and suspension data for minimum of 5% reduction Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS and Attendance Data Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed X X X X 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 4.2 2014 SDE Review Finding (IIT) Teachers formally and informally engage in conversations on strategic instructional practices and decision-making, but there is little evidence that teachers consistently use data and research-based strategies to adjust their practices to meet the needs of all sub-groups of students. 2014 NYS ELA and MATH Data ELA - 5.6% of students scored at Proficiency or above Math- 1.9% of students scored at Proficiency or above School Strengths: ● We provide high level professional development opportunities and coaching for teachers to learn research based practices that will improve their own pedagogy and result in increased student outcomes ● Our faculty are eager to improve their own practices and student outcomes 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 32  ● The school has the ability to track the development of faculty toward improved effectiveness in all components of the Danielson Framework, with an emphasis on questioning and discussion techniques, student engagement, and the use of assessment to inform instruction. School Needs: ● Based on student achievement data and both internal and external feedback, it will be important to train faculty for and implement common, consistent strategies for reading support so that students will be able to access the curriculum in all subject areas. It will be important for collaborative teacher teams to adjust curricula, units and lessons to embed reading supports. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? 09X022 is organized in teams. Each grade level is composed of 2 teams focusing on delivering rigorous instruction to our students. One team focuses on providing rigorous instructions to students with disabilities while the other team focuses on providing rigorous instruction to our English language learners. In addition to professional development times allotted after school, weekly common planning time is built into all faculty schedules. At 09X022, faculty adhere to our 22 Must Have fundamental when designing and implementing instructional practices. 22’s 22 are below: DOMAIN 1: High-level learning occurs when we PLAN and... 1. Learning/Language Objectives meet the 22 way when they… o begin with “We will be able to...” (WWBAT) o are posted throughout the duration of the lesson o are derived from CCLS essential standards o describe specifically what students are expected to know and be able to do by the end of the period o include academic vocabulary ( Depth Of Knowledge Levels 2-4; 22’s Tier 2 ) o include the process by which students will reach LO 2. Lesson plans for all subjects include: o Learning Objectives o Anticipatory Set /Do Now o higher order questions & activities (DOK aligned)* o a logical progression of activities leading to demonstrating mastery of the LO o Kagan Structure 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 33  o multiple-entry points (process/product/content)* o Purposeful groupings based on assessment data o a closure with an opportunity for student reflection 3. Learning Objectives progress toward mastery of essential standards 4. There is evidence that assessments informed planning DOMAIN 2: High-level learning occurs when our LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS have... 0. Teachers who greet and welcome students from the doorway as they enter 1. Unit-appropriate Tier 2 and Tier 3 Word Wall accessible to students 2. Posted student work, within the current unit, with actionable feedback aligned to a rubric 3. Current unit artifacts of teaching and learning on the walls or bulletin boards 4. RORS behavior expectations posted and reinforced (as necessary) during the lesson 5. Lesson plans available in digital or hard copy during the lesson 6. Routines for safe and fast student movement and transitions (need exit routine posted) 7. Student work organized by unit and/or standard in portfolios 8. Teachers monitor and track student progress towards RORS. o track RORS  following routines (entry routines/learning routines/exit routines)  classroom behavior  attendance DOMAIN 3: High-level learning occurs during INSTRUCTION when... 0. Teacher facilitates the unpacking of Learning Objective resulting in: o students being able to express in their own words what they’re learning and why they’re learning it o how it fits within unit goal 1. There is an activity for students to do when they enter that connects to the day’s learning or meets student needs 2. There is a closure activity to reflect on progress toward the LO based on the lesson’s work 3. Meaning-making or text-reading occurs in every period. There is a routinized annotation/coding process 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 34  4. Students interact purposefully using a Kagan structure in every lesson 5. There are at least 3 DOK Level 2-4 (higher order) questions/prompts o Teacher provides wait time for thoughtful responses and encourages extension 6. Multiple entry points aligned to the Learning Objective 7. In every classroom, faculty will provide feedback to student responses to initiated questions (IRF vs. IRE). In every classroom, teachers will use Accountable Talk stems to facilitate students extension and enrichment of discussions that invite comments from their classmates and challenge one another’s thinking. 8. There is daily, meaningful evidence of student progress toward the LO. Teacher checks for understanding and monitors student progress toward the LO during the lesson o tracking classwork completion o tracking classwork mastery Faculty plan collaboratively in content as well as grade teams. Needs of high achieving students are met via multiple entry points and ELT enrichment a opportunities. Student safety is ensured via our RORS value system (be Respectful, be Organized, be Responsible, be Safe and school-wide use of Restorative practices and LSCI strategies. In addition to common formative assessment by content, faculty also track classwork completion (effort), Learning Objective mastery, RORS behavior and student attendance. Inquiry teams review data in a systematic basis to determine next actions to meet student needs. CBO partners will be included in all inquiry conversations to support student success. How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? Full collaboration amongst School Instructional Cabinet will improve teacher practice and student learning. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Teacher teams will collaborate to improve teacher practice and student outcomes. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Teacher will collaborate across teams to improve teacher practices and student outcomes. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Data Reviewed Intent iReady Benchmark Progress monitoring Diagnostic/Proficiency Formative Data Student Anecdotal/PBIS Data Progress monitoring Progress monitoring 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 35  Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, all faculty will engage in inquiry cycles in both content and grade teams. Across all core contents, teachers analyze student work products to determine problems of practice to support meaning-making and engage in inquiry to improve teacher practice. The result will be 80% of students with 80% attendance or better will increase average ELA proficiency scores from 19% to 25% and average Math proficiency ratings from 12% to 20% as evidenced on the New York State assessments. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks expected to improve by meeting Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal are: Collaborative Teachers; Average Math Proficiency Rating; Performance Index in State ELA/Math Exam; Attendance. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 36 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All content area teachers Performance Index in State ELA/Math Exam; Attendance September 2018 – June 2019 TMI coaches, content coaches, supervisors and principal How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) i-Ready data; MOTP Ratings All teachers and students Performance Index in State ELA/Math Exam; Attendance September 2018 – June 2019 Content coaches, supervisors and principal i-Ready data; MOTP Ratings Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Teachers will be provided with a variety of research-based reading strategies for meaning-making to support students in their comprehension of text Content supervisors and coaches support and monitor the explicit teaching and practice of teaching academic vocabulary that supports language development and further improves students’ ability to comprehend texts and participate successfully in instructional tasks. Performance Index in State ELA/Math Exam; Attendance September 2018 – June 2019 Content coaches, supervisors and principal i-Ready data; MOTP Ratings Teacher teams Engage teachers in collaborative, supportive team meetings to engage in inquiry cycles to analyze student assessment data and adjust their instruction and instructional groupings based on students' ability to make meaning. Develop trusting relationships with teachers by providing them with a repertoire All teachers Performance Index in State ELA/Math Exam; Attendance September 2018 – June 2019 Content coaches, supervisors and principal i-Ready data; MOTP Ratings 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 37  of strategies to support their ability to implement instructional practices that have positive impact on 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School will engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home through parent participation in team meetings and collaborative problem solving protocols. Key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight are administration team, grade team leaders and school counselors. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school will utilize funding from their Persistently Struggling Schools Grant (PSSG) along with other funding sources to expand the use of critical resources. The following resources will be leveraged in order to deepen our work and better support achievement of our collaborative teachers goal:  CCLS aligned curricula  Engage NY resources  Curriculum coaches and Instructional Coaches  PSSG Funding for Expanded Learning Time (Teacher Per Session and Per Diem Substitutes)  PSSG Vendors: The Danielson Group, TMI, Metamorphosis, National Training Network Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School X Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By January 2019—classroom observation data captured in faculty development tracker will reflect reading strategies implemented in 100% of classrooms. BY January 2019- Examine progress monitoring data for 75% improvement (student outcomes) to determine effectiveness of interventions and re-tiering of students in ELA and Mathematics with focus on SWDs, ELLs and Lowest-third students. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 38  By January 2019, ADVANCE and internal coaching data will indicate 30% increase in teachers rated effective or above in Danielson components b, c, and d. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Classroom observation tracker Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 39  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 2.5 2014-15 SDE Review Findings (IIT) The school leader established clear SMART goals and a long-term vision that effectively manages fiscal and programmatic resources. Additionally, the school leader supports and recognizes the importance of all stakeholders in the academic, emotional and social well-being of all sub-groups of students. However, although some stakeholders might not be able to articulate the vision in a meaningful way, it is clear that teachers, staff, students, and parents understand the spirit of this vision and voice support for it. ADVANCE OBSERVATION DATA 2013-14 – Approximately 60% of teachers scored below Proficient levels on Danielson Components 3b (Questioning and Discussion), 3c ( Student Learning), 3d (Using Assessment in Instruction) School Strengths: The school has articulated a clear instructional focus school wide which is known and shared by all stake holders and is being systematically and consistently supported and monitored. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 40  Teachers are participating in professional learning opportunities, including coaching , with supportive, actionable feedback for improvement. Supervisors and coaches have developed consistency in observing and identifying areas of need/growth for teachers Teacher observation data is charted and frequently analyzed to determine areas of focus for professional development and additional coaching. Based on Advance observation data and feedback from the IIT Review, it is clear that teachers practices in delivering rigorous instruction is a critical area in need of improvement. School leader will also participate in PLC@Work Institutes to increase leadership capacity. Annual school-wide retreat to ensure team cohesion and alignment with school vision will support ensuring high-level learning for all. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? 09x022 will continue to refine our Faculty Development Tracker aligned to Danielson and 22’s 22. Professional development decisions will be based on trends identified through data collection. 09X022 will continue to partner with existing supports – Teaching Matters Incorporated, Center for the Professional Education of Teachers and is pursuing a new partnership with Solution Tree, Inc. CBO partners will be involved in data inquiry cycles focusing on both standard mastery and social-emotional health. Student and teacher programs will be organized into teams to ensure maximum teaching and learning time. Fiscal capital will be aligned to ensure success of our school mission – ensuring high-level learning for all. Teacher observations will be scheduled based on faculty ADVANCE choices. At 09X022, observations are delineated between coaching and ADVANCE observations. Faculty are notified prior to any ADVANCE observations. By October 15, all faculty will have had 1 ADVANCE informal observation conducted by assistant principals. Principal will conduct mid-line informal/formal observations between December and February. 09X022 works to create authentic PLCs where all faculty/staff are expected to practice reciprocal responsibility. All expectations are transparent and all and all are expected to make commitments. 09X022 has begun work adopting Skedula, which allows for transparency and sharing with multiple constituents. Assistant principals will be responsible for ensuring high-level learning for specific content areas and ensuring an RORS learning environment. Community School Director will ensure coordination and alignment of ELT program and all external support organizations. On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? Distributive Leadership and System Monitoring What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 41 Through varied forms of communication and distributive leadership structures that revise and ratify changes to vision, mission, and instructional focus, everyone at 09X022 will have a normed and shared understanding of the school's vision, mission, and instructional focus What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? Through systemic organizational structures, teacher leaders facilitate content and grade teams. Teacher rounds and strategic use of Peer Collaborative and Model Teachers will build broad capacity within our school. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? Leader will foster collaborative school governance processes that ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders. How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy Daily 24-48hours 90%-100% What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) IEP Field Support Center Instructional leaders and faculty Formative/Summative Data Field Support Center Instructional leaders and faculty How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? Student and teacher programs will be organized to ensure student needs are met with fiscal capital allocated to best meet those needs. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, principal and school leaders will have implemented a cycle of Professional Learning and inter-class visitations with PCTs and Model teachers to build teacher’ capacity to use assessment in instruction. The results will 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 42 be 80% of teachers rated Effective or above in Component 3d and an increase in ELA proficiency rating from 19% to 25% and average Math proficiency rating from 12% to 20% as evidenced on the New York State assessments. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? 09X022 believes the following Renewal Benchmarks will improve by meeting Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal Collaborative Teachers; Rigorous Instruction; Average Math Proficiency Rating; Performance Index on State ELA/Math 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 43  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Develop and implement a year-long schedule and tracking system for informal and formal observations. Principal, assistant principals, instructional coaches Performance Index on State ELA/Math August, 2018 Rigorous Instruction September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, instructional coaches Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Principal, Renewal Coach Advance Web Application Observation Completion Rate Principal, Renewal Coach MOTP Ratings Leadership coach learning walks with administration will be conducted throughout the year to support further development of providing targeted feedback to teachers Administrators will use observation data to develop targeted professional learning experiences for teachers in all subjects. Teacher will engage in intervisitations to observe best practices in designing coherent instruction (1e) and using assessment in instruction (3d) to plan next steps for implementation in their own classes to develop peer support and trusting relationships among colleagues All faculty Collaborative Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administration Team MOTP Ratings All faculty Rigorous Instruction September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals MOTP Ratings 4b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 44  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School will engage engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home by conducting parent leadership workshops. Key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight are Administration team and CBO staff. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school will utilize funding from their Persistently Struggling Schools Grant (PSSG) along with other funding sources to expand the use of critical resources. The following resources will be leveraged in order to deepen our work and better support achievement of our effective school leadership goal:  All faculty  Assistant Principals  Curriculum coaches and Instructional Coaches  Common planning time built into school calendar and weekly schedules  PSSG Funding for Expanded Learning Time (Supervisor Per Session)  PSSG Vendors: Fantastic Tours and Optimization with an Impact Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School X Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. December 2018 – Faculty observation data and common learning assessments will be analyzed to ensure that 100% of observation data aligns with student learning outcomes for all faculty. February 2019 -Internal coaching data will indicate all faculty increasing their proficiency in implementing strategies for using assessment in instruction (3d) of the Danielson Framework by one level (e.g. ineffective to developing; developing to proficient; proficient to highly effective. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher Surveys; ADVANCE data Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 45  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 6.4 2014 DTSDE Review Finding (IIT) School leaders and staff members demonstrate care and concern for students and parents. While the school has a number of strategies and programs in place that provide outreach opportunities, not all communication with the parents/guardians is provided in the primary language of school population, thereby restricting opportunities for families to understand, participate and benefit from the home-school connection. This limits the participation of an invaluable group of stakeholders in providing the support that is critical for every child’s academic success and social and emotional health. 2014 Learning Environment Survey According to NYCDoE Learning Environment Survey 13-14, over 90% of parents surveyed (a survey response rate of 82%, 28% higher than the city average) indicated satisfaction with the school in three key areas – Instructional Core, Systems for Improvement, and School Culture. School Strengths: ● The school faculty consistently reach out to parents and engage in communication with parents regarding student progress 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 46  ● The school conducts parent nights and other school celebrations that bring out more than 75% of parents ● The school faculty coordinate outreach efforts to families to provide maximum support ● The school sends a handbook home to parents that delineates all requirements and expectations in the beginning of the school year. School Needs: ● Additional work needs to be done in supporting faculty interactions and collaboration with families to support student social and emotional development health to support student success. Multiple pathways for communicating with parents need to be explored and implemented to ensure that all parents/families are included. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? A Family Engagement Center supervised by Community Schools Director and staffed by 09X022 will be housed on premise. Monthly family engagement activities that address parent needs will be planned. School Safety Officers and staff will be involved in community engagement activities to ensure a welcoming environment. CBO partners will provide training to support SSA and school staffs’ understanding of student and parent demographics. CBO partners will conduct out-reach and engagement activities to ensure that all families feel welcomed in included in their child’s education. Dedicated space will be provide for the Family Engagement Center. Adult education classes are already offered – Basic Education which leads to a GED and ESL and currently serves over 90 students. Adult education program will be expanded based on parent and community needs. Families will be able to access and understand student data and progress via training on Skedula’s Pupil Path platform. Families will have real time access to student attendance, academic, and behavioral data. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? Within the Community School model, families will be welcomed and made part of the school community. Administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers will be provided supports to create a welcoming environment. There will be dedicated space for families in the school. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? School will identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 47  How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? School will engage the community and families. School will ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about children being taught. What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale Monthly Family Walkthroughs Monthly Family Learning Nights To encourage families to take and active role in what their child is learning. To encourage families to take and active role in what their child is learning. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Family partnership with school Family partnerships with CBO: Family partnership with CBO Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Yes What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? 09X022 currently provides access to adult education classes on-site and will continue to do so. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? Data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families are knowledgeable of their children's scholastic success. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, school community will engage in meaningful collaboration with families and communities to identify, communicate and support opportunities for family and community members to volunteer to support our school. This will result in 67% (up from 62%) of families who say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school on the NYCDOE Learning Environment Survey. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 48  Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks expected to improve by meeting Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal are: Student attendance; student and parent responses to NYCDOE Learning Environment Survey; Provide 200 Hours of Extended Learning; Implement Community School Model 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 49  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Faculty will identify opportunities for family and community members to volunteer in school. A menu of opportunity will be created. Caregivers provided with menu of activities during all family engagement activities and through backpacking notices home. Additionally, menu will be available on school website and social media platforms Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All faculty and staff NYCDOE Learning Environment Survey Sep. 2018 – June 2019 Community Schools Director, Parent Coordinator; Grade Team Leaders; School administration; all teachers How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Meeting notes NYCDOE Learning Environment Survey Sep. 2018 – June 2019 Parent coordinator; Community School Director; all faculty; caregivers Physical evidence of menu of activities Members of the school community – parents, caregivers, guardians Parent Coordinator will coordinate responses and schedules for volunteers Targeted caregivers and families in crisis NYCDOE Learning Environment Survey Sep. 2018– June 2019 Community Schools Director; Grade Team Leaders; School administration Caregivers NYCDOE Learning Environment Survey Parent Coordinator and grade teams will follow-up with volunteers with surveys and meetings Sep. 2018 – June 2019 Community Schools Director, Parent Coordinator; Grade Team Leaders; School administration Survey response data; Volunteer schedules created Surveys and meeting agenda/notes Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school will utilize funding from their Persistently Struggling Schools Grant (PSSG) along with other funding sources to expand the use of critical resources. The following resources will be leveraged in order to deepen our work and better support achievement of our strong family/community ties goal: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 50   Parent engagement funds  Parent Coordinator  Guidance Counselors  Per session for after-school training    PSSG Vendors: Digital Light & Sound Videoing, Safe and Civil Schools, and Sheltering Arms  New York Botanical Garden Sheltering Arms personnel SBO Option 1 for AM parent/family engagement. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Caregiver Survey will be distributed in November 2018 and February 2019 to track caregiver satisfaction with expectation of 5% improvement in three key areas – instructional core, systems for improvement and school culture to make necessary adjustments. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Caregiver/Student Surveys Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 51  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. The goals of the ELT is very specific and will focus on the following measurable outcomes: ● Higher classroom grades and work quality ● Higher level of engagement and understanding of targeted subject areas ● Increase in vocabulary and comprehension ● Lower incidents of anti-social behavior and improved attendance The ELT will use existing benchmarks such as the NYS Math Screener and other progression toward mastery tools in targeted subject areas. There will be an ongoing analysis of student classroom work based upon grades submitted by classroom teacher as recorded on ATS; specific reports culled from ATS will as be used to analyze students attendance; the school OORS reports will be used to assess student behavior; the existing RORS (Respecfult/Organized/Responsible/Safe) classroom behavioral logs will be used assess ongoing student behavior. These logs help determine if particular students need additional attention. We work with an itinerant MSW to engage students exhibiting at-risk behavior, helping to manage their conduct through counsel and guidance. Required intervention for student behavior issued will be addressed anger management and conflict resolution services provided through Bronx Works; counseling for presented mental health needs will be provided through direct services from on-site school partners, ASTOR and Sheltering Arms social workers and therapists. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Through an SBO approved by the faculty, 100% of 09X022 have committed to ELT and will adhere to Option 5 of the NYCDOE ELT Model. With 100% faculty participation in ELT, ELT will be built into the school day to ensure consistency 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 52  of instructional delivery and support built-in advisory, reading intervention and RTI periods within the school day that do not conflict with core instruction. Engage parents through collaboration with the school’s Parent Teacher’s Association and Program Coordinator to encourage stronger parent participation in student academic performance. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? Through an SBO approved by the faculty, 100% of 09X022 have committed to ELT and will adhere to Option 5 of the NYCDOE ELT Model. With 100% faculty participation in ELT, ELT will be built into the school day to ensure consistency of instructional delivery and support built-in advisory, reading intervention and RTI periods within the school day that do not conflict with core instruction. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. Through an SBO approved by the faculty, 100% of 09X022 have committed to ELT and will adhere to Option 5 of the NYCDOE ELT Model. With 100% faculty participation in ELT, ELT will be built into the school day to ensure consistency of instructional delivery and support built-in advisory, reading intervention and RTI periods within the school day that do not conflict with core instruction. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 53  ELT program will commence in September 2018 and end in June 2019 Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. SBO Option 5 allows for all faculty to participate in ELT. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) Tax Levy Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks Formative assessment data indicate progress of a minimum of 3% in ELA and 4% in math. By February 2019, there will be a 2.5% reduction in suspensions and incidents. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. IReady Benchmark Data; OORS Data Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 54  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, 100% of the students in Levels 1 and Levels 2 will, by NYS ELA and Math assessment data, score above the 50 th percentile in median adjusted growth. By June 2019, Sheltering Arms’ collaboration in and support of 09X022’s strategic attendance intervention plan will result in an attendance rate for 09X022 of 93% or higher. By June 2019, the number of level four and five incidences and suspensions will be reduced by 10% as a result of social-emotional interventions implemented by MS 22 and Sheltering Arms. By June 2019, Sheltering Arms will support all faculty will engage to in meaningful collaboration with student families to promote shared responsibility for student academic progress and social-emotional growth and well-being resulting in an increased in rates of satisfaction on all four indicators of the 2016 NYCDoE Learning Environment Survey. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks expected to improve by meeting our Community School Program Annual Goal are: Collaborative Teachers; Rigorous Instruction; Average Math Proficiency Rating; Performance Index on State ELA/Math Exam; Attendance Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Sheltering Arms LeAp all students all students socio-emotional/academic support socio-emotional/academic support Astor Children & Social Services Tier 3 students socio-emotional support Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the 2. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 55  3. 4. right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 1. The Community School Director (CSD) will be adaptable to the specific and changing needs of the school. Additionally s/he will be a highly capable communicator, analyst, liaison, and relationship builder to ensure effective allocation of resources and integration of services to address the full range of issues affecting families. The CSD will build a strong working relationship with the school and collaborate on the implementation of a needs assessment, conduct targeted community partnership building, and facilitate resource connections for the school’s families. Sheltering Arms’ School-based Programs administrators, Human Resources (HR) and Finance departments will support the CSD in program operations and staff supervision. The CSD’s first task will be establishing relationships with school leadership to understand the school’s vision, environment, and population. S/he will then work with the school to create an implementation strategy for a needs assessment. Through an inventory of existing internal and external resources and surveying for outstanding needs, the CSD and school leadership will establish focus areas to establish improvement goals and develop resource connections. To ensure that families are connected to necessary resources, the CSD will generate awareness of these services by coordinating presentations and workshops for students, families, and staff. While firsthand presentation to students and families is essential, including teachers and guidance counselors will be critical to promote referrals and remove stigma for those students and families hesitant to utilize services. 2. Sheltering Arms is working collaboratively with us to develop a plan to offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) programming. This programming will be aligned with the school's vision, with focus areas developed based on results from state exams and report cards, as well as expressed needs and interests. Sheltering Arms will reinforce curricula through the integration of key educational areas (literacy, STEM, 21st Century Skills) into clubs and activities rather than simply extending instruction. To ensure that students remain stimulated, Sheltering Arms will offer interactive learning through educational films and follow-up discussions, experiments, independent research projects, and educational games. In partnership with teachers from each grade, they will customize curricula based on student needs and ensure programming aligns with school and state goals, sharing syllabi to facilitate the development of complementary services. To assess program effectiveness and student progress, we will implement pre- and post- testing in science, math, literacy, and 21 st Century Skills. The first three will be aligned with Common Core standards, while the latter will be based on the Partnership for 21 st Century Skills' Framework for 21 st Century Learning. The results will help us determine areas of need, identify struggling students, and inform the direction of programming and instruction. Beyond academics, students will have improved access to cultural resources and recreation. We will offer cultural programming that will ensure that the youth are exposed to music and art, which will enhance learning by reinforcing concepts and boosting the ability to retain information. We will provide opportunities to promote interest and skills development in the arts, supplemented by immersion through trips to cultural institutions. We will offer high-quality 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 56  recreational activities such as sports and dance that result in skills development, promoting movement and fitness during program hours and beyond. As for mental health programming, MS 22 will work with Sheltering Arms to leverage the agency’s substantial mental health experience and expertise serving a middle school population to coordinate and plan holistic school-based mental health services. This approach will include providing services in a neutral (non-clinical) setting within a safe, de-stigmatizing school environment. The approach will include working collaboratively with school and CBO staff to conduct home visits, provide counseling, offer educational/enrichment sessions and behavior modification activities. 3. Sheltering Arms is committed to and has substantial experience engaging families and community members as partners in education. The agency recognizes the importance of extending learning beyond the classroom and into the household and community. In an effort to increase family and community involvement at MS 22, parents and community members will be invited to participate in Visioning Sessions prior to the beginning of the school year. These Visioning Sessions will encourage families and community members to provide input into program design, and gain a deeper under standing of the Renewal Schools and Community Schools initiatives. In collaboration with the school’s Parent Coordinator and others, Sheltering Arms will plan and implement family events incorporating the expertise of community partners . For example, offerings will include parent/child cooking workshops , art classes , career workshops etc. Social bonding between parents and children will be promoted by inviting parents to attend trips and social events. Community partners will be engaged to offer families a wide range of cultural and educational opportunities. Parents will be invited to holiday events and cultural nights where they will be encouraged to forge relationships with other parents and to create formal and informal support networks. Families will be engaged to attend student performances and to support children in their chosen interests and take part in their successes. Volunteer opportunities will be created for parents throughout the school year in an effort to get them into the school building and motivated to play a greater role in their child’s education. Sheltering Arms and the MS 22 Parent Coordinator will work to assemble parent volunteers that can help organize events, and will help parents learn to take the lead on activities. Ongoing communication between parents, school, and Sheltering Arms staff will take place during parent-teacher conferences, social events, after school pickup and via phone. Parents will be informed of students’ academic challenges, behavioral issues and absenteeism. Parents will also be engaged around positive student achievements such as improved test scores and/or behavior, and student participation in the activities offered. At the end of the school year, parents, students, school staff, employees, and partners will be asked to complete satisfaction surveys giving them an opportunity to provide feedback on the activities offered. They will be given opportunities to evaluate safety, efficacy of the program initiatives, and student engagement. All stakeholders will be asked to offer suggestions on how to improve the school and program s . This input and feedback will be thoroughly and consistently considered in the design phase of programs for the following year. 4. The Principal and the CS Director will meet weekly with select Assistant Principals, key staff, and partner CBOs to analyze trends and discuss individual student progress. The Principal and CS Director will access all available tools and trainings offered Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 57  The Principal, Community School Director and other key staff from Sheltering Arms will work together with school based staff and existing high quality partner CBOs to implement, oversee and assess programming. The Community School programming will be continuously discussed and evaluated to assess its impact on student achievement. As discussed above, pre- and post-testing will be implemented and ongoing assessment of student grades and test scores will be used to assess impact on student achievement. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. The Principal and Sheltering Arms are working together to determine staffing needs and assess the need for schedule adjustments Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Implementation of the Community School model at MS22 began as soon as Sheltering Arms was notified of the contract award (May 2015). There have already been several meetings between the Principal and senior Sheltering Arms staff, and these meetings and discussions are scheduled to continue over the next several weeks and throughout the summer months. It’s too early at this stage to determine the time line for completion of implementation and oversight. Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 58  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Based on universal and secondary screening, students identified needing decoding, fluency and/or comprehension support Performance on Common Formative Assessments Provide targeted support for at-risk students in ELA. Performance on 14-15 NYS Math Exam Basic Skill Screener Results Performance on Common Formative Assessments Provide targeted support for at-risk students in Math to remediate learning needs Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Really Great Reading & STARI Strategic Intervention for all students with screener scores indicating below grade reading levels Small Group During school day Small Group During school day Small Group Saturday and Vacation Mastery Academies Kaplan Skills and Strategies Small Group During the school day 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 59  Use of Summative Standard-based Proficiency data Science Demonstrated need based on teacher observation. Non-fiction Reading Comprehension Program Performance on Common Formative Assessments Social Studies Demonstrated need based on teacher observation. Non-fiction Reading Comprehension Program Performance on Common Formative Assessments PBIS Data analysis Student Referral Data Data-driven behaviorally-based counseling aligned to academy grade-level teams At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Small Groups Small Group Small Group Small Group Saturday and Vacation Mastery Academies During the school day Saturday Mastery Academies During the school day Small Group Small Group 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 60  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 76 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Socio-emotional support groups; academic intervention; resource allocation Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 61  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 62  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 09X022 recruits HQT via the offices and programs below. All prospective candidates also undergo a modified Star Teacher Selection Interview Protocol: ● NYCDOE office of Teacher Quality and Recruitment ● Hunter College ● Fordham University ● Teachers College, Columbia University ● NYCDOE Teaching Collaborative ● NYCDOE Teaching Fellows Program ● Teach for America 09X022 retains HQT by the following: ● Sustained and targeted new teacher mentoring via Educators for Social Responsibility ● Leadership opportunities in instructional leadership, student support, SWD, and ELLs and extensive off-site professional development opportunities for all faculty leaders. ● Weekly school-wide, departmental, and academy common planning opportunities. 09X022 supports HQT by providing high quality professional development via: ● Bronx Borough Field Support Center ● District 9 Superintendency 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 63  ● Distrct 9 Director of School Improvement ● NYCDOE School Renewal Team ● Center for Professional Education of Teachers – Teachers College, Columbia University ● Math in the City – City University of New York ● Morningside Center ● Urban Advantage ● NYCDOE Office of English Language Learners; NYCDOE Office of Teacher Effectiveness Fordham University NYS/NYC Regional Bilingual/ESL Resource Network 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 09X022 adheres to weekly and monthly data-based cycles-of-inquiry aligned to CCSS and Danielson Framework via content departmental meetings as well as interdisciplinary academy meetings . Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 64  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Common formative assessments for all content areas aligned to CCLS essential standards are created via teacher teams. Inquiry groups analyze assessment data to make instructional adjustments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 552,766.00 0 21,872.00 0 3,490,391.00 Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 65  combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 66  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 09X022 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 09X022 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 67  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 68  to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) 09022, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 69  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 70  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy;  advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 71  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 72  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 73  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 74  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: According to 2016-2017 and 2017-2018 NYSESLAT data, 09X022 is having increasing success in moving students through the Language Proficiency Levels. This data demonstrate that in 2017 - 2018 MS 22 had more English Language Learners moving at least one proficiency level, moving 2 proficiency levels and more students reaching the commanding level. We saw that students identified as SIFE were having less success and remaining at the entering and emerging levels even after 2 + years in NYC schools and/or MS 22. Research shows that prior to acquiring academic language, language learners must first gain proficiency in conversational and social language. It is also essential that teachers link new concepts with students' background experiences and past learning. This link should not be inferred, but must be made explicitly. Five (5), ENL certified teachers and one (1) content teacher will work on making connections with what students are going to learn and with what they have already learned and experienced. Using a combination of direct instruction in co-teaching teams, KWL charts, student journals, reviews of previously learned information, and the use information charts will used to support both first language and English as a New Language learning. All teachers working the supplemental program, both over the summer and after school starting November 5, 2018 through 4/18/19, will be WITsi trained and implement specific strategies that improve student writing, content knowledge, academic vocabulary, oral language, reading comprehension, standardized exam performance, and student thinking. Each session will be 1 hour two days a week for supplemental and 4 hours for the summer 2019. The WITsi strategies are particularly powerful for English Language Learners because the provide a concrete way to teach language embedded in content and because it also teaches students how the English language works. Teachers will develop background knowledge, deliver content that is contextualized, and use gestures, pictures and realia to make input comprehensible. The teachers will provide visual clues to create meaning and they will assign "hands-on" tasks. Visuals include pictures, photographs, realia, maps, graphic organizers and charts. Hands-on activities that help ELLs are collaborative projects such as mobiles, murals, demonstrations, science experiments, time lines, and pictures with labels. All teachers will give clear, simple directions to ENL students, breaking complex directions down into simple steps, asking students to retell, in their own words, checking for understanding to ensure clarity before students attempt a task. Building on our prior investment in Imagine Learning software, students identified as having interrupted formal education will be supported in developing their BICS (Basic Interpersonal and Communicative Skills). Imagine Learning is a research-based, standards-aligned curriculum that builds core reading and academic language skills, including first-language support in 15 languages. This program has begun and students identified as SIFE will continue using this program for 15 - 20 minutes as part of the above detailed, after-school program for 6-9 months, as needed. Instruction will take place after school four days a week from 2:20 PM to 3:20 PM. All students identified as ELLs in grades 6th, 7th & 8th grades will participate in this after school program. Title III funds for direct instruction will be supplemented with other funding sources to ensure the sustainability of the program from September through June. In addition, a Saturday 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 75  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information program from 9:00 AM - 12:00 PM will begin late - Early January to support newcomers and their families in their transition to the United States. This program will provide language learning support for students and their families through film and multimedia presentations and experiential field trips. Family members will be encouraged to remain on Saturdays and participate in language development activities. The language of instruction will be in English with native language support. Long term ELLS and Former ELLs in grades 6-8 will also be provided with this additional support. Teachers will keep records of students' progress and attendance using online record keepers in Google sheets. All parent notifications, letters and communications will be sent home in English and translated in Parents' home language. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The School-based professional development continues to center around the expressed needs of our students as well as the needs of our ENL faculty. Collaborating with our ENL faculty, the administrative cabinet is charged with planning and structuring meaningful professional development that meets the needs of our faculty serving English Language Learners. All pedagogues are scheduled for a mandatory team-planning period, once a week from 3.30-4:30 , for professional development. Professional development topics to be addressed will include: --The integrated Co-teaching model --The ENL Stand alone program --Differentiating and scaffolding instruction --Understanding and using the Bilingual Common Core Initiative for instruction -- Aligning performance standards for ENL, ELA, and Language Arts Progressions --QTEL models -- Writing strategies for ELLs --Use of graphic organizers --planning for and supporting SIFE --Using data to guide instruction --Effective Strategies for English Language Learners at every Stage of Language Acquisition All ENL staff will be have completed or will be attending "Writing is Thinking through Strategic Inquiry (WITsi) 101 training. This is a remote three-day workshop that covers foundational content (sentences to parallel revision) and is specifically geared to those who work with or who want to learn how to support students for whom English is a new language, including bilingual teachers in the content areas. It presents an approach to implementing WIT that amplifies language development in a content-integrated way. It adds to the WIT basket the use of oral 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 76  Part C: Professional Development language, home language and additional scaffolds to support vocabulary and thinking that enable multilingual students to communicate effectively across content areas. The workshop addresses support for students at all levels of language proficiency, including newcomers and students with inconsistent formal education (SIFE) with low literacy in their home language. The following agencies are providing Professional Development at no cost to the Title III program to our ENL faculty and to content faculty working with ELLs. Many ENL faculty have already attended SIOP Training. They will regularly turnkey and lead ELL-centered professional development for school staff throughout the year. Content area teachers who work with our ELLs will get an opportunity to learn the skills and strategies developed from QTEL. This information will be shared with content teachers working with ELLs by our ENL teachers. Workshops and training will assist our ELLS in both their receptive and productive language acquisition. On a monthly basis, our ENL team with share strategies and ideas during the team and content planning periods. In our team-planning meetings, grade level teachers, paraprofessionals and administrators will participate in the turn key The ENL team has and will continue to attend professional development offered by the City and State to develop new strategies. The ENL team will research data-driven instructional tools to best assist all sub-groups. Furthermore the Regional Bilingual Education Resource Network (RBERN) will be providing coaching and Professional development along with the ELL Services Coordinator from the Bronx Borough Field Support Center. They will be to working with both ENL and content teachers. Agendas and attendance sheet will be collected and maintained by the supervising Assistant Principal . Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Research indicates that parent engagement is essential for student success. In accordance with that, parent engagement activities that highlight ELL student achievement are the center pieces of our school's efforts. Two awards ceremonies (mid-year -January- 5:30 - 6:30 PM and year end 5:30 - 6:30 PM) will be been planned to specifically highlight the ELL programming and support services students received and to recognize the learning and achievements of our ELL student populations. These activities will be lead by school faculty and staff. Parents will be notified via translated invitations presented in backpacks, by mail and by robo-call. An additional Parent Meeting will be held mid-June to inform parents of preliminary NYSESLAT testing outcomes and student programming for the following academic year. When parents are engaged in their children's learning, children are more successful. Based on parent and student interviews, and along with the student outings where parents are invited to attend, two additional Parent Engagement activities are scheduled. The first is a visit to their childrens' Saturday Academy classes. The second is a shared experience to a visit El Museo Del Barrio. At the Museum, the parents of Title III and ELL students will browse the museum and 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 77 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities their children will engage their parents in some of language acquisition strategies, for example, Visual Thinking Strategies and speaking to each other in noticings and wonderings. An electronic and hard copy of invitations, permission slips and attendance will be maintained by the supervising Assistant Principal. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 78  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 9 School Name Jordan L. Mott MS 22 Borough Bronx School Number 22 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Edgar Lin Coach Esteban David ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ana Quezada Teacher/Subject Area Sonia Flannory/ENL Teacher/Subject Area John Ibarra/ENL Related-Service Provider Joann Augustine Superintendent Leticia Rosario Assistant Principal Brandy Franklin Coach Esteban David School Counselor Seneida Sosa Parent Magaly Cordova Parent Coordinator Yaditza Rodriguez Field Support Center Staff Member Dr. Caterina DiTillio Other (Name and Title) -- C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 6 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 456 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 79 Total number of ELLs 166 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 36.40%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? MS 22 uses a variety of tools to assess early literacy. The results of the NYSITELL and Spanish LAB are two initial tools used. We also administer the SIFE questionnaire and when indicated the SIFE MLS. Based on the results, a combination of running records in Spanish and English and teacher made assessments and observations serve as formative assessments. The data can reveal SIFE status not already ascertained, as well as the literacy levels in Home language and English. This data is then used to determine the amount of support needed, in-class grouping. Additionally, in all core contents a cycle of diagnostic and formative assessments are administered to all students to gauge the standards mastery and/or progress made towards standards master. After a unit of study is completed, a diagnostic (CFA) is administered. The data is then disaggregated, finding areas of strength and areas with little or no movement toward standards mastery. This data informs the instructional direction and in some cases specific groupings for re-teaching. In the stand-alone and integrated ENL classes, ENL teachers use this data to deliver instruction that focuses on language and 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 80  content. Data has demonstrated the need for academic vocabulary development. Furthermore, observational data has revealed that students need more opportunities for structured talk and as a school, we are embedding these opportunities into every lesson across contents. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have an ENL Committee that works to ensure first compliance for newly admitted students. This committee includes, the ENL coordinator (AP), 3 ENL teachers for intake including Home language survey and SIFE Questionnaire, our Parent Coordinator who shows the welcome video and then follows up. The committee works to place students in the appropriate Stand-alone class based on the HLIS, SIFE Questionnaire, NYSITELL, Spanish Lab (if needed) and one on one interviews. ENL teachers and Co-teachers work together on creating multiple entry points to ensure access for all students in daily lessons. Aileen Colon from R-Bern, the Bronx Field Support Center share and teacher leaders share strategies with each other and with the ir content teacher partners. and information to ensure that instruction is meeting the needs of all of our ENL learners. The ENL team meets once a week to ensure continued support. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? To evaluate the success of our ELL program at MS 22, we look not only to meeting AYP, but also to the degree of language acquisition. We look to move students along the continuum of language acquisition, first through points in speaking, listening, reading and writing then through performance levels. We look to move students from entering to emerging and from emerging to extending. True success is to have students progress at least one level per school year. All students take NYC performance tasks for Social Studies and Mathematics. Teacher created summative assessments and they are used in ELA and Social Studies. Lastly, every student, including all English Language Learners take a universal Screener through i-ready in September. We then administer a secondary screener that includes Correct Words Read per minute, beginning decoding survey and an advanced decoding survey. This information is used in our RTI and Strategic Reading periods. A midline and endline in both i-ready and our secondary screener is administered in January/February and in May respectively. These allow us to measure progress and language acquisition. The secondary screener gives information about the students understanding of letter and letter sounds and combinations, fluency and syllabication. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ENL team and individual teachers analyze results o find focus areas. These focus areas guide the professional Learning goals and the team works to refine instruction and to include specific strategies, scaffolds and methods to address the learning gaps. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] MS 22 uses iReady as a universal screening tool along with the HLIS. These are used along with our SIFE screens. Results are disaggregated and students will be tiered in homogeneous groups according to the results. Tier 1 students will receive scaffolding and specific academic within their core classes and in their ENL stand alone classes. Tier 2 students will receive specific instruction using imagine learning and ENL reading smart. Tier 3 students begin with Rosetta Stone and/or the SIFE curriculum and may move on to one of our Reading Programs from Really Great Reading. These research based programs are intervention to address severe, moderate and mild decoding issues. These programs have been found to be effective for students with Interrupted Formal Education. These groupings are flexible groupings and adjusted based on regular assessments. Additionally students’ tiers are based on the assessments results of each program. In each tier students are provided with instruction that increases in intensity and lessons that are culturally and linguistically responsive. Teachers build in progress monitoring to ensure all students' needs are being met. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. In the past data patterns shown in NYSITELL and NYSESLAT in and across grades have revealed that students identified as SIFE transition more slowly from Bilingual programs to ENL classes. It is also revealed that these same students are more apt to become Long-term ENL learners, continuing to score at emerging and transitioning on the NYSESLAT and then who remain in 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 81  Transitional Bilingual programs form sixth to eighth grade. This is in contrast to students without Interrupted formal education who steadily advance through the language progressions, moving out of the Transitional Bilingual program into the ENL program from grade to grade. Additionally students placed in homogeneous class also show slower growth in language acquisition. These results have indicated a need for more heterogeneous grouping within our classes. The ELL Data Analysis Tools show that fewer students are classified as long term ELLS. The data also shows that as students progress along the language continuum, students begin scoring at level 2 and the number of students scoring at PL 1 in ELA drops considerably. The data also show that Speaking is, by far, the strongest modality across the school with 80/145 students scoring high. Alternately, writing is the weakest with Reading and listening within range. This information informs our integrated co-teaching and stand-alone programs as we are now encouraging students to turn speech to text. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL team along with our Data Analysis consultant and our ENL consultants from West Ed work together to review the data from the EDAT, as well as formative and summative assessments, to make decisions about programs, units and focus for instruction. The team then shares these findings in grade and content meetings to ensure all teachers working with the same students have the most current information and instructional strategies. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our integrated ENL instruction is delivered from 2 certified ENL teachers per grade. Each ENL teacher cores with either Social Studies and ELA content teachers or Science and Mathematics content teachers. These classes are grouped heterogeneously. MS 22’s ENL program uses an Integrated Collaborative approach to instruction. Teachers plan lesson and use a flexible grouping approach, differentiating according to language acquisition and student needs according to modality and the task.. This model provides language development support in all core content areas. Additionally we provide 4 periods of stand alone ENL instruction per week. These stand alone classes are grouped homogeneously, entering and emerging in one of 3 grade classes and transitioning, expanding and former ELLS in one of three different classes. All 6 stand alone classes are taught by certified ENL teachers. This provides students with more than the required 180 or 360 minutes of ENL instruction required. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All Core classes are 50 minutes long five times per week. ENL is delivered to students both in the integrated co-teaching model and as a stand-alone class. Stand alone ENL classes are 50 minutes 4 times a week giving each entitled student a base of 200 minutes. This exceed the minimum requirements for students at Transitioning - through commanding levels. In addition, the integrated teaching schedule provides all students with an additional 200-300 minutes per week. At MS 22 we 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 82  have doubled the number of ENL teachers serving our students from three to six and this allows this scheduling to occur. This ensures that we not only deliver the minimum instructional minutes, but exceed the requirements for all of our students. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ELA, Social Studies, Math and Science Instruction are delivered in English to students in our ENL program. Instruction is planned and developed through a partnership between core content teachers and the ENL co-teachers so that learning is scaffolded as needed to not only build content proficiency, but language proficiency as well. This ensures that the Common Core Learning Standards, oracy and literacy links to productive and receptive language are being addressed. Similarly in our Stand-alone program, teachers use the New Language Progression and grade level curricula ensuring that appropriate scaffolding and support is provided to all learners. English is the language of instruction with some language scaffolding to meet the needs of newcomers. Wherever possible peer partners work together. One partner usually is more proficient in English and works with their partner to accelerate language acquisition. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Newcomers in our ENL programs may be assessed in English with some or all information translated to their home language. Assessments are scaffolded using language translations where necessary. The goal is to reduce the translations from passages, to paragraphs to key academic vocabulary--incrementally removing the scaffolding and supporting English acquisition. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) Teachers differentiate in a variety of ways to accommodate all our learners. SIFE students receive Tier 3 intervention in RtI as well as specific skills necessary for phonemic awareness, letter, word and language and in English using Really Great Reading programs. They receive 3 periods per day of small group instruction--2 periods across grades and one smaller group on grade level. Students testing at third grade or below are grouped both homogeneously for targeted instruction and heterogeneously so that they can learn from the expertise of fellow students. b/c) Newcomers and developing students will be provided with differentiated instruction during the RtI period. Students are grouped heterogeneously in core content classes for their integrated ENL programming. During the RtI periods, students are grouped homogeneously by NYSESLAT/NYSITELL performance level and grade. These groups are flexible and students may change groups throughout the school year based on assessment data and teacher observation. . d) Long-term ELLs may be provided with either Tier 2 or Tier 3 RtI interventions. Additionally they may receive targeted intervention in vocabulary development. These students will be in flexible groups based on needs and formative assessments for progress monitoring ascertain the modality or modalities that may be inhibiting their progression. e) Former ELLs, up to two years after exiting ELL status, are placed in integrated ENL classes. They continue to receive testing accommodations and teachers use flexible grouping to ensure that they continue to progress and furthermore that they can be models for students at different levels of their progression. These students will have scaffolds removed as indicated by their progress. They continue to be served in Integrated and stand-alone ENL classes. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELLs-SWD use the same grade-level and possibly translated materials used across grades. It may also be necessary to chunk material and provide additional graphic organizers to assist with breaking down of tasks, and read/think-alouds to ensure the students have access to the material and continues with language development. ENL teachers use The New Language Arts Progression to help decide on the scaffolds necessary to create the access points for content and to accelerate Language development. ELLs-SWD are place in the CLass based on their IEPs. School scheduling priorities 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 83  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? MS 22 programs students into the appropriate setting based on IEPs. ELL-SWDs receive Stand alone ENL instruction as part of their schedule 4 times per week a total of 200 minutes. When students are identified as ELL SWD at entering or emerging, an ESL teacher will push in to ensure the student is receiving the required ENL instructional minutes. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The 2017-2018 RtI program is a targeted intervention plan around literacy and numeracy. Intervention programs range from , Rosetta Stone software to develop basic conversational English for students at entering level to programs offering ELA and Mathematics instruction targeted to ELLS such as Imagine Learning and ENL smart reading to iReady--delivering engaging online lessons at each student’s level based on results from the online adaptive Diagnostic. SIFE and Long-term ELLs, depending on the screener data, might be placed in a Really Great Reading Program -a very direct instructional approach to letter/sound/word analysis to assist with decoding and reading and comprehension. . Students at Transitioning, Expanding or Commanding are grouped with similar readers for small-group Strategic Reading Instruction. This includes former ELLs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are keeping our Targeted Instruction period, now called Strategic Reading Intervention as well as our RtI period called W.I.N. ( What I Need) These RtI periods, ensure, that along with reading interventions, we are giving students the appropriate interventions for all core classes. This way we will include all core content areas, as well, as behavior interventions in our RtI model. As a Renewal school, we now have Extended Learning Time. This allows another hour, four times per week, to ensure high-level learning for all students. This year we are scheduling students identified as SIFE and performing at grade 3 or below with three periods of Early Literacy intervention. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The EDAT, RLAT and NYSESLAT data over the past 3 years indicate that students in our TBE classes were slower to acquire English language and the NYSESLAT scores indicated their performance levels were much slower to advance. Students, whose families opted for ENL classes made faster jumps in NYSESLAT performance levels sometimes jumping ahead 2 performance levels in a year. MS 22's work with WestEd and our shared research demonstrate that students that are English Language Learners have greater language acquisition and increased learning outcomes in heterogeneously grouped core classes ( Integrated ENL Co-teaching) and with homogeneously grouped stand- alone ENL classes. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students have access to our Visual, technology and Dramatic arts program as part of their scheduled day. Our CBO partner LeAp accepts all students in their after school programs and many of its staff are bilingual, including the Director. These programs include, but are not limited to : cooking, basketball, robotics, architecture Letters and applications are printed in multiple languages and distributed to all students . LeAp also brings families in to celebrate the ongoing work they do with the students. Additionally, all Saturday Academies throughout the school year ( ELA/Math and ENL) are open to all students. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Translations of instructional materials are provided whenever possible, glossaries and translation dictionaries are provided. MS 22 has a 1x1 ratio of Chromebooks to students and each classroom is equipped with a Smartboard and an ELMO document camera. In ELA, Social Studies and Science, classroom libraries are provided in both English and Spanish. In Mathematics, Engage NY Math curriculum is provided in Spanish. The Teacher made ELA curriculum uses whole texts, short stories, articles and excerpts and Spanish language translations may be used. Teachers in content areas working with teachers of ENL provide scaffolds, graphic organizers, sentence starters, and translated versions of text when needed. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 84  Each grade, 6-8, has two ENL teachers. One serves children in English Language Arts and Social Studies classes and the other serves children in Science and Mathematics classes. Home language support is provided in the ENL model using our RTI periods to help with language acquisition. Students may respond in their home language orally and in writing and then the expectation is that along the course of the school year the use of home language in ENL will decrease over time as scaffolds for English responses are provided. All of our HLA classes are on Tuesdays and Thursdays, this was scheduled so our HLA teacher is able to push in to our TBE and ENL classes on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays for Home language support and to ensue that the Home Language is adequately supported. In our TBE model students may read, write and respond in their Home language. Instruction begins in Science and Mathematics in students' home language and is decreased over time. It is also expected that students' responses in their home language will also decrease over time as students show readiness and more proficiency in English. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We cross reference the students identified as ELLs with SESIS reports. We ensure our ELLs with IEPs are being served in the appropriate placement and are receiving all resources and supports. The ENL and compliance team ensure each student is scheduled for the appropriate ENL and HLA course with the required number of minutes. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Grade teams (All teachers on grade, School Counselor, Dean, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator) and POD teams (All teachers working with specific groups of students ie. ELLs) work together to plan family information, celebration and community events. Additionally, teachers of newly enrolled have newcomers lunch once a month. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? None at this time 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? To support all ELL personnel including Bilingual teacher, ENL teachers, and cooperating Content Teachers every Tuesday starting in November, will be dedicated to working with ELLs. Topics covered Include: Targets of Measure (ToM) and creating Learning and language objectives, Performance Level Descriptions (PLDs), Measuring progress in Listening Speaking, Reading and writing modalities in content areas, how to incorporate L,S,R,W across lesson plans, Language reception and Language production according to PLDs, Co-teaching in the Integrated ENL classroom: Pre-planning , co-planning, and post planning, Using data. Differentiating instruction, Using Bilingual 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 85  Common Core Initiative,BCCI, and the language demands of informational texts. R-Bern Provides on going staff development in-house and provides suggested trainings, PLC and Professional Developments available to teacher working with ELL students through DOE, R-Bern and Fordham University. Additionally, the Bronx BFSC will continue working with teacher Teams that serve MS. 22's English Language Learners on co-teaching and structured talk protocols. MS 22 has hired West Ed Consultants to work with all teacher teams serving our English language Learners. Their work with MS 22 began with a needs assessment and continues with planning for all of our learners, structures talk and student grouping. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Bilingual Guidance Counselor, supports students with High School Selection based on personal and Language needs. She researches and arranges for High school fair visits. We will continue to provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 154.2 must be dedicated to: -- language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. --For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours will be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? MS 22 ELL coordinator and the ENL team serving students calendar the days to individually meet with the parents or guardians of English language learners at least once a year. These appointment are in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians, to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Parents or guardians are informed about the child’s language development in all content areas in English and in the child’s home language in the case of students enrolled in a bilingual education program. These meetings are conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. Translation in Spanish is available through our Parent Coordinator, Yaditza Rodriguez or bilingual School Counselor. If translation services are required in a language other than Spanish, we procure the services of an Interpretation vendor through NYCDOE. We will begin logging participation and outreach attempts. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The Morrisania community is a low income neighborhood. Neighborhood Scout's research shows that this neighborhood has an income lower that 94.4 % of U.S. neighborhoods. With 52.9% of the children here below the federal poverty line, this neighborhood has a higher rate of childhood poverty than 91.7 % of U.S. neighborhoods making it among the lowest income neighborhoods in America. Additional challenges our families face are single parent homes, temporary housing, and fathers 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 86  who are incarcerated. Specific activities that foster parental involvement include the following: -Immigration Aid Forum - Legal services and Immigration assistance to all family members. Lawyers from Bronx Legal Services and Mayor's Office of Immigrant Affairs volunteered to service our families. -IDNYC - Informative Session informing all families they are eligible for the Free New York City Identification Card: IDNYC. Families learn about the programs many benefits and get help scheduling appointments to receive ID's. -Building Young Professionals & Leap Afterschool - Families were able to sign up for free summer day camp for ages 5-12. -Highbridge Islamic Centers - provide classes for English for Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL), Citizenship Preparation and After School Homework help for its increasing and underserved African, Caribbean and Latino populations. -Beautification Project - Parents, children, community, and staff join efforts to beautify our community by planting gardens around our building. Outreach Teams Joining us and Providing Free Lunch, Groceries, Encouragement and Prayer! -6 th Grade Parent Orientation - Our new families come into school to meet Principal, Teachers, Guidance Counselors and Parent Coordinator. They are part of informative sessions, receive free grocery bags with fresh fruits and vegetables. -Neighborhood Free groceries of fresh fruits and vegetables. -Back To School Night - Parent's follow their child's schedule with transitions beginning at 5:20 p.m. from class to class and listen to a Read Aloud, Learn math in an interactive way, Be a Scientist and Historian for a night, and Learn basics of Theatre Arts. Afterwards all families/classes walk outside to school backyard and form a big circle to engage in science project holding hands and energy stick. Principal Lin is in center of circle explaining to families the importance of supporting one another and how we are all interconnected. When we all hold hands the energy stick lights up. -Community forums -Adult ENL classes -Adult GED classes -Parent Association and PA Meeting informing families of services such as Adult Education Classes, Medical Services on site, Parent Volunteer program, Upcoming events such as community play in collaboration with Assembly woman Joyner's office bringing a message against violence and offering encouragement and hope. Parent Coodinator, Yaditza Rodriguez and Technology Coordinator, Luis Lopez provide Spanish translations of spoken agenda as well as translations for all written information for distribution.. If translation services are required we procure the services if an Interpretation vendor through NYCDOE. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 87  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 88 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Edgar Lin, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 89  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: MS 22 Jordan L. Mott School DBN: 09X022 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Edgar Lin Title Principal Brandy Franklin Assistant Principal Yaditza Rodriguez Parent Coordinator Sonia Flannory ENL/Bilingual Teacher Magaly Cordova Parent John Ibarra/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area ESTEBAN DAVID Coach Coach Seneida Sosa School Counselor Leticia Rosario Dr. Caterina DiTillio Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Bronx Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 90  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 09X022 School Name: Jordan L. Mott Junior High School Superintendent: Leticia Rosario The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Secondary Franklin Flannory Brandy Sonia no no yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Upon registration for the first time into the DOE system the enrollment team (enrollment secretary and ENL coordinator) inquires were made with parents regarding their language preferences. They are asked to fill out a home language identification survey. Copies of the language surveys are kept in the ENL binder. Additional copies are available in individual student files. This paperwork should remain in the student’s cumulative folder. In addition to this information parents are asked to fill out, and update, the student's Emergency Contact forms, where they must also indicate there home language preference, in written form and oral form. All documents are accessible in the Main Office. All information is submitted into ATS, and remains up to date. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 91  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Afrikaans Arabic Bengali French English Slovak Spanish Soninke 1 4 3 5 201 0 227 2 0.23 0.9 0.68 1.13 45.37 0 51.24 0.45 1 3 3 5 198 1 230 2 0.23 0.68 0.68 1.13 44.7 0.23 51.92 0.45 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our Office, ENL and faculty staff will translate documents in Spanish, French and Arabic. Translation services and Google translate will be used for lower frequency languages. All documents for translation will be given to translators a minimum of 5 days prior to distribution. All documents necessary for first time enrollment of students are translated and kept accessible in the main office. This includes the HLIS, SIFE Questionnaire. When the orientation meeting happens for entitled English Language Learners necessary documents are translated. These include entitlement letters, parent survey and program selection, program placement, ELL brouchure, NYSESLAT notification. Parent-teacher conference announcements are translated. After-school & Saturday school information September November December February March May 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 92  is translated. New York State testing dates and notifications are translated. Letters that are sent in the beginning of the year will be translated in the preferred language of choice. Documents will be provided the first week of September, during Parent Teacher Conferences in November and March, and at the first week of June. Parent-teacher conference announcements are translated. September, November, March, May After-school & Saturday school information is translated. On-going New York State testing dates and notifications are translated. September, January, February, April, May Our Office, ENL and faculty staff will translate documents in Spanish, French and Arabic. Translation services and Google translate will be used for lower frequency languages. All documents for translation will be given to translators a minimum of 5 days prior to distribution. Our Office, ENL and faculty staff will translate documents in Spanish, French and Arabic. Translation services and Google translate will be used for lower frequency languages. All documents for translation will be given to translators a minimum of 5 days prior to distribution. Our Office, ENL and faculty staff will translate documents in Spanish, French and Arabic. Translation services and Google translate will be used for lower frequency languages. All documents for translation will be given to translators a minimum of 5 days prior to distribution. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Advisor-Caregiver Conferenc 09.20 - 09.25.2017 es 11.22 - 11.27.2017; 03.1 - 03.06.2018; 05.04 - 05.08.2018 2018-19 RSCEP-PF interpretation service(s)? All formal face to face meetings will have a Spanish translator present, including parent teacher conferences, curriculum nights, open houses and orientation meetings. These translator will typically be in house trained pedagogues. Since we have a number of staff members that are bilingual we will use our in house resources for informal interactions that may occur. 93  Advisor-Caregiver Conferenc es 11.22 - 11.27.2017 Advisor-Caregiver Conferenc es 03.1 - 03.06.2018 Advisor-Caregiver Conferenc es 05.04 - 05.08.2018 If another language is requested the LAC will call the Language and Interpretation Unit. Additionally, the Language and Interpretation Unit information will be displayed in the main office and at the security desk. All formal face to face meetings will have a Spanish translator present, including parent teacher conferences, curriculum nights, open houses and orientation meetings. These translator will typically be in house trained pedagogues. Since we have a number of staff members that are bilingual we will use our in house resources for informal interactions that may occur. If another language is requested the LAC will call the Language and Interpretation Unit. Additionally, the Language and Interpretation Unit information will be displayed in the main office and at the security desk. All formal face to face meetings will have a Spanish translator present, including parent teacher conferences, curriculum nights, open houses and orientation meetings. These translator will typically be in house trained pedagogues. Since we have a number of staff members that are bilingual we will use our in house resources for informal interactions that may occur. If another language is requested the LAC will call the Language and Interpretation Unit. Additionally, the Language and Interpretation Unit information will be displayed in the main office and at the security desk. All formal face to face meetings will have a Spanish translator present, including parent teacher conferences, curriculum nights, open houses and orientation meetings. These translator will typically be in house trained pedagogues. Since we have a number of staff members that are bilingual we will use our in house resources for informal interactions that may occur. If another language is requested the LAC will call the Language and Interpretation Unit. Additionally, the Language and Interpretation Unit 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 94  information will be displayed in the main office and at the security desk. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. MS 022 will set robo-calls for all English and Spanish speaking parents. Translators will personally call the homes of Families with Limited English Proficiency with a translated message obtained from the Language and Interpretation Unit in all lower frequency home languages as detailed on the HLISs. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Copies of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 will be distributed with pertinent points highlighted. LAC will oversee the distribution and training to ensure staff are aware of these regulations. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The LAC and parent Coordinator will attend the training held by the translation and interpretation unit. They will then turn key this information to the entire staff. The LAC will collaborate with the office staff to ensure that the proper notifications are given to the parents in the preferred language of choice. This will be made available at the parents request. The Welcome Poster and Language ID Guide will be posted in the main office and at the security desk in order to inform parents at the time of arrival that translation and interpretation services are available. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The LAC will create a parent survey to distribute during parent teacher conferences to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 95 
