 09X219 School Name: I.S. 219 NEW VENTURE SCHOOL Principal: KELLEYANN ROYCE GIRON 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: New Venture Community School 320900010219 School Number (DBN): 09X219 BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: 6-8 3630 Third Avenue 718-681-7094 Phone Number: 718-681-7324 Fax: KelleyannRoyce-Giron Kroycegiron@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: Children's Aid Society KelleyannRoyce-Giron Lupe Guevara Celeste Smith DolethaHayes ZanetteJoseph LashaneCrossland Joshua Grant District Information Geographical District: 9 Superintendent’s Office Address: Leticia Rosario Superintendent: 1245 Washington Ave Bronx, NY 10456 Lrosario2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-579-7143 Phone Number: 718-410-7017 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. School Receivership In April 2015, state lawmakers and Governor Andrew Cuomo created section 211-f of the State Education Law, which established the School Receivership program as a new intervention strategy to turn around struggling schools. This new law, and Commissioner’s regulation 100.19, requires that “Persistently Struggling Schools,” defined as Priority Schools that have been in the most severe accountability status since the 2006-07 school year, be given an initial one or two-year period under a “Superintendent Receiver”. These schools were placed in receivership under the New York City Schools Chancellor. Each school must make demonstrable improvement on specific benchmarks or it will be placed under an independent receiver. Under the Chancellor’s Receivership Plan, the School Renewal Program is NYCDOE’s 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 5  core strategy for turning around struggling schools. Renewal Schools have already begun implementing significant interventions and are receiving additional resources and support to accelerate student performance and help close achievement gaps reflected in this RSCEP. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 6  The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 7  School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 8  Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group KelleyannRoyce-Giron Celeste Smith DolethaHayes Madeline Aponte LashaneCrossland Joshua Grant TBD Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 10  Check if SLT X X Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Yocasty Diaz Zanette Joseph Wellington Lopez Kelley Burke Teacher Teacher Children’s Aid Society Children’s Aid Society Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Community Engagement Team (CET) Signature Page Directions: Please fill out this form and indicate members of your Community Engagement Team. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each Community Engagement Team member in the first column. 2. Record the position and constituent group represented in the second column. 3. Community Engagement Team members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If a Community Engagement Team member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original signature page. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) KelleyannRoyce-Giron Principal Celeste Smith Lupe Guevara 2018-19 RSCEP-PF UFT Chapter Chair Community School Director 11  TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 12  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. At New Venture Community School our mission is to create, promote and sustain a school community that fosters a culture of mutual support, respect and collective responsibility for the intellectual, social-emotional, physical, and family well-being of the middle level learner. At New Venture Community School we believe all students deserve a comprehensive education where their needs are met. Through the application of a CCLS aligned curriculum, students will develop critical thinking skills that deepen their knowledge and prepare them for the workplace of the 21 st Century. At New Venture Community School we believe all of our students will continue on the pathway leading them to further develop themselves into ethical, productive, and tolerant citizens who will make positive contributions to a global society. We aim to create conditions for learning that are at at a level where all of our students can thrive and succeed. We believe that there is the greatest strength for a community when there is a partnership of individuals and groups who share a common vision, and a set of values that becomes a unifying force. For our students to succeed, we need all of our community stakeholders working together to provide the support structures so urgently needed by our students and families. We know the barriers that are often faced by children of color and those who live in economically distressed neighborhoods. We need to make sure that our students and families have the access to the resources that will keep them healthy, socially and emotionally sound, supported by family, and most importantly, well-educated and prosperous. Understanding that students learn best when their physical, mental, emotional and other needs are met, New Venture Community School is deeply committed to the community school strategy as our model for increasing school connectedness, improving student attendance, increasing course pass rates and reducing chronic absenteeism. Through our partnership with The Children’s Aid Society (CAS), New Venture Community School has a Community School Director to further coordinate the school’s existing array of partnerships and services. Our overarching goal is to ensure that every student has an individual support plan that addresses their academic, social emotional, family and health strengths and needs. New Venture Community School staff works closely with the CAS staff to identify students in need of targeted interventions, such as attendance and/or academics needs. This work includes connecting families to service providers such as those in the medical, dental and mental health fields. Families will also be offered opportunities to support their child’s education through participation in workshops, celebrations of student work, and school-wide events. We will also continue to provide families with ESL and GED support classes on weekends. New Venture Community School has been on the forefront of the work addressing chronic absenteeism as we were one of the original 25 schools selected through the Mayor’s Task force addressing this problem. This past year we were a model school in this area, providing support to other schools through a town hall meeting we hosted for over twenty city schools, where we presented and discussed our best practices. We highlighted the importance of understanding how chronic absenteeism has a cumulative and cyclical effect which hinders both a student’s short- and long-term educational success, as well as presented the strategies we have used to help students and families change behaviors in order to improve attendance outcomes. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 13  During our current school year, we will continue to provide support to our chronically absent students through the use of success mentors. These success mentors will focus on our identified students who are chronically absent. At New Venture Community School, our major concern are the students who were chronically absent this past year (2017-2018), characterized as missing more than 20 days of school. It is this population of chronically and severely chronically absent students that CAS and New Venture Community School propose to target through a Success Mentoring program, modeled after the NYCDOE’s Success Mentor Corps. The demonstrated impact of the Success Mentor Corps approach will offer our students who are struggling with truancy the targeted support they need to get back on the right path in order to be successful at school. In addition, to address the significant learning gap commonly experienced by chronically absent students, and academically struggling students as well, we will implement an Academic Intervention Services (AIS) component for these targeted students. In addition to our chronically absent students, we are working with additional groups of students, who may share similar or more acute challenges such as our students who live in temporary housing (STH). These students and their families live in situations that sometimes impede their ability to be most successful due to barriers presented by living under temporary and often continuously changing conditions. We work closely with these students to provide them a consistent and stable learning environment, replete with additional school support, such as mentoring, social-emotional services and academic intervention. We have a group of students who are multiple holdovers, oftentimes, held over for multiple years prior to attending New Venture Community School. We work closely with these students to improve their attendance, to provide counseling support for their social-emotional well-being, and to better equip them academically through intensive, targeted interventions. We believe that this tri-fold approach ensures that, as graduates, they will have the skills necessary to be successful in high school and beyond. We also are attuned to our large population of students for whom English is a New Language, (our ENL students). We have worked diligently over the last few years to provide more resources for our ENL students in order to enhance opportunities for inclusion throughout the school’s academic infrastructure. We see enormous potential within this group and hope to continue providing pertinent and strategic resources that are specific to their needs, including ESL support programs for their families. A significant number of our students are classified as a Student with Disabilities (SWD). These students are either in an Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classroom, a special class (self-contained), or in a General Education class with attendant support services. Our Special Education team ensures that our students receive the services to which they are entitled. All of our SWD students have the same access to all of our school academic and enrichment offerings. We have developed a strong team approach to meeting the unique needs as identified in their Individual Education Plan (IEP). This IEP is developed in collaboration with both assessment personnel, support services team and classroom teachers, and its objectives are known and shared by all who work with the particular student. It is this team approach that allows our students to flourish in the least restrictive environment possible, within our constant goal of providing total inclusive education to every student. During our Extended Learning Time, teachers will provide all students with four additional hours of academic support. We also believe that all students will benefit from a Friday afternoon enrichment program determined by student interest to increase motivation for everyday attendance. We will also commence a Saturday school program provided by New Venture Community School and Children’s Aid Society focused on intensive intervention and learning supports. With the proper instructional, social-emotional and health support structures, it is expected that all of our students will improve academically and socially. We are targeting growth of a 10% increase in students attaining proficiency levels (3 and 4) on NYS assessments, as well as a decrease in the number of students scoring at Level 1. Finally, we anticipate an increase in our average course passing rate to 80% for students across major subjects. Looking at our data we realized that students need opportunities to be fully engaged in rich content that addresses the common core learning standards as well as opportunities to build college and career readiness. We are focusing 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 14  on fully developing a STEAM initiative where students will have opportunities to learn through hands-on and project-based learning within the sciences, technology, engineering, the arts and mathematics. Our School Leadership Team is at the core of connecting our school community and is vital to the success of our proposed strategies. By bringing together our school’s leaders, Children’s Aid Society, representation from our Parent Association, and our community’s stakeholders, New Venture Community School’s Leadership Team provides an ideal structure for collaborative and transparent decision making, and policy and program development for initiatives such as: enrichment clubs, attendance improvement, and our sixth grade one-to-one technology initiative. We will also use the SLT meetings to continually evaluate and assess our attendance improvement strategy and make adjustments as needed. Our goal as a school community has been to promote, enact and support a school model based on the premise that school is central to the lives of its community members. We see school as place where students and families can have access to resources for the support and development of student success. These resources are made available within the school or outside the school, and include services that address physical, social, emotional, recreational and academic needs. We see families as partners in their child’s education. We also see it as our responsibility to provide the tools by identifying services, trainings and workshops that would best support families in their role as caregiver. We have seen dramatic improvements in areas such as: improved academic indicators, a reduction in incidents and suspensions, and a reduction in the level of students who are chronically absent.The outcomes for every initiative and program are measured, tracked and analyzed on an ongoing basis. The results of these analyses are discussed at our weekly Student Success Summit meetings, as well as during faculty conferences, administration meetings, and through conversations with staff, students, parents/guardians and our CBO partners. We will also provide staff with an ongoing series of Professional Development workshops and activities, based on a needs survey, to further support the achievement of our RSCEP goals. Our work with parents and community partners to improve academic outcomes and reduce absenteeism and re-engage youth has centered around the value of giving parents and guardians pertinent, meaningful, and timely information to help families be better informed about the choices made that may impact a child’s performance and attendance in school. Additionally, we have provided the community with unlimited access to our guidance support services and newly established health clinic allowing for a true partnership to develop around improving outcomes for the whole child. This work has includes providing parents and guardians with an ongoing series of workshops, based on a needs survey, designed to provide participants with an enhanced skill set to better meet the educational, social and emotional needs of their children. We have implemented the following services:  Individual Counseling: one on one meetings with students to discuss areas of needed development including social, emotional, behavioral, academic and relational skills  Group Counseling: general support or work around a common theme with a small group of students   Implementation of school-wide initiatives such as attendance meetings, town hall meetings, etc. Family Support: individual meetings, family meetings, home visits, parent events and workshops, as well as research and identification of community resources that enhance family access Our school community has developed an acronym that describes our core beliefs centered around stakeholder success – DREAM. This acronym represents the core values of Determination, Respect, Excellence, Accountability, and Motivation. We use this acronym to establish a clear and well-communicated code of conduct that focuses on the above stated values. We have developed a DREAM Center where students receive social-emotional support through art therapy, restorative circles and other forms of support. Our school strongly supports and engages in regular communication with students and families to encourage and promote high expectations for academic growth. Data is shared with students and families through Skedula, in order to promote and encourage reciprocal communication, and to empower families to advocate for their children. As a result, all stakeholders work together to support students’ academic, social and emotional developmental health. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 15  Ourinstructional focusthis year will continue to support student engagement and academic rigor through the use of Expeditionary Learning and Teachers College Writing Units in English Language Arts, and the Five Practices for Orchestrating Productive Math Discussion approach in Mathematics. We will expect all content areas to use student focused discussion techniques to ensure that students engage in high level discourse using academic language and textual evidence to support their thinking. Writing across content areas and grades will be aligned to common rubrics in three genres based on the Teachers College units of study. Vocabulary development will focus on supporting students in the reading of complex text and the writing of narrative, informational and argumentative text. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 16  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X219 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 352 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 62 62 9 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 20 9 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 94.0% % Attendance Rate 94.3% % Reduced Lunch 26.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 59.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.08 0% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 21.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 19 19 89.6% 0.0% 30.4% 38.4% 0.6% 0.3% 4 38% 8 10.1% 32% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 17  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Based on our reflections from our IIT review, our school would like to focus on Tenet 3.2 – As we continue to support a robust curriculum and further our goal of improving our Effective HEDI rating, our school will continue to develop a robust Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) aligned curriculum. These curricula will be supported by on-going professional learning for all staff members. Teachers have identified gaps in student learning and are addressing these gaps through differentiation and small group instruction, which will be reflected in the curriculum. We, as a school will also focus on the following:  Identifying learner-centered challenges and identifying the problem of practice that correlates to these challenges.  Providing teachers with the necessary strategies that address the learner-centered problem.  High expectations for all need to be articulated and supported through rigorous daily instruction that engages all learners. Tenet 3.3 –. We are focusing on using data to identify and address student deficiencies and current student achievement needs. We are using formative and summative data aligned to our key standards in order to provide targeted instruction on an ongoing basis. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 19  Tenet 3.4 - Teachers have more opportunity to meet by teams and develop units that support interdisciplinary teaching and learning. Our teachers are being trained in Google classroom. Collaboration is occurring through planning opportunities made available on Mondays and during the week. Students have periods built into their schedules where they have access to chromebooks in order to work in I-Ready. Students are given greater access to technology through the technology lab which is scheduled for all students. We are exploring more opportunities to build interdisciplinary units of study. Tenet 3.5 – In order to improve progress monitoring teachers are using a tool called Mastery Connect to capture data and track individual student progress on mastery of standards. The use of assessments at the beginning, middle and end of a unit is a practice that is being adopted school wide to monitor and support tracking of student progress and learning gaps. This work is being supported through a PD partner called Assessment Matters from the organization known as Teaching Matters. The use of rubrics and exemplars needs to improve school wide in order to clarify what constitutes excellent work for our students.   Student progress monitoring is taking place in every subject and in every class Formative and summative assessments are being utilized to inform practice and guide small group and differentiated instruction.  The use of rubrics is evident school wide to inform students of how their work is being evaluated.  Students are receiving feedback on all their tasks in order to help them identify their own strengths and areas for growth. At New Venture Community School, teachers and the administration have coherent common planning embedded in their program to work collaboratively, across different content areas, different grades, and as an entire school. Varied professional learning opportunities will be offered on Rigorous Instruction, aligned to the CCLS and the Framework for Great Schools, by: the District 9 team, Borough Field office personnel, the Office of School Renewal staff, Assessment Matters, Harvard's Datawise program, the Children’s Aid Society, and Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) staff developer. We will also promote inter-visitations among teachers to enhance pedagogical practice, and engage in lesson study during subject meetings, grade meetings, and Inquiry team meetings. In Math, 67% of students are level 1 and 23% of students are level 2. In ELA, 38% of students are level 1 and 40% are level 2. Our school community has prioritized infusing data in our daily instructional practices. Our teachers and instructional support team will analyze ways to use data in order to identify both strengths and needs. The use of data will identify which academic area(s) need focused instruction to promote accelerated learning. Our staff has a clear understanding of writing lesson plans; however, they must increase the cognitive, or higher-order thinking, demand embedded within these lessons. Based on our observations through our Quality Review and informal observations, we will continue to provide professional learning cycles on what constitutes rigorous instruction. Similarly, teachers and the school community have access to data and item analysis for every student; however, staff members still struggle with how to make meaning of the data to impact their instruction. Protocols for looking at student data and work will be implemented to maintain focus on accelerating student learning and provided targeted, specific small group and individualized instruction. To assist in gathering "real time" data, we will make use of iReady on-line assessments and other "on the spot" assessments. Analysis of this data will enable teachers to identify gaps in student learning and to address these gaps through differentiated instruction and through small group guided instruction. Providing meaningful feedback to students may be the most critical element in accelerating learning. It is no longer "enough" to simply go over exams, or give students time to "review and revise" their work. Teachers must be adept at providing targeted feedback with specific next steps for each student. Professional learning will be provided to teachers to enhance their ability to use their data to provide high leverage feedback that is both granular in scope to enable the student to know precisely what to do next, and sufficiently rigorous to accelerate student attainment of mastery of standard. Teachers must model the delivery of this feedback through the use of rubrics and exemplars, so that students will be able to assess their own work, as well as provide high quality feedback to their peers. The use 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 20  Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? Our Instructional Focus: If teachers engage in inquiry teams to analyze all forms of data in order to identify problems of practice that are matched with learner - centered gaps in content and/or skill, study and implement research-based learning strategies, deepen their understanding of academic language development and incorporate common protocols, rubrics and performance - based assessments that intellectually engage and challenge our students then they will be better able effective individualized instruction that meets the unique needs of all of our students in their pursuit of mastery of standards, and that builds skills necessary for our students to be owners of their own learning. Time is scheduled through professional periods, common planning periods, and our weekly professional development for teacher collaboration. A Saturday Academy instructional program will enable students to enhance, enrich, and extend literacy and mathematics strategies acquired during the daily and after-school programs. During the Saturday Academy, students will develop in-depth content knowledge that is inquiry-based around themes/topics being taught throughout their entire instructional program. Students will be involved in projects that require them to discuss ideas (language/listening development). Students will work in various learning settings; i.e., paired, small groups, or individually. They will do extensive reading to develop schema around specific topics. Independent reading materials, i.e., trade books and novels, leveled to meet student need, will be used. These books will be aligned to the themes being developed during the daily instructional program to ensure an in-depth understanding of text. Students throughout the grades will have access to books at both their instructional and independent levels. As students acquire more literacy strategies, the text materials will become increasingly more difficult. Data will be desegregated to support students at their level with the goal of raising their capacity for improved achievement throughout the school year. All administrators and teachers at the New Venture STEAM Academy use data collected on students to make decisions that range from grouping to grading. School data is shared with staff by using guiding questions to facilitate assessment. To insure that students’ needs are adequately addressed, students will be administered baseline and formative assessments in all curricular areas to identify those skills and concepts that may need re-teaching. Periodic school-based and district benchmark tests and student work will be used to determine students’ progress towards meeting CCLS. Formative assessments will play an integral role in guiding instruction. Student work will be evaluated using school-criteria that support high academic standards. As per feedback from members of the School Leadership Team, more independent activities will be assigned for practice at home via Khan Academy, Read Works and Common Lit. Training opportunities for parents will be offered. What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? Our school will use curricula that will provide opportunities for all learners to access text. We will use Teachers College writing units, Expeditionary Learning, PBIS hands on science curriculum, the NYC Social Studies Passport curriculum, and EngageNY math curriculum. Additionally all of our students have arts programming which include music, musical theater, and the visual arts. Our students will also be working on documentaries through the arts program. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 21  What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? We will provide students with challenging subject matter in all content areas that provides opportunity for problem solving, team learning approaches, access to technological learning tools, and access to additional support around standard mastery. Students are expected to write each day in all content areas. We will begin the process of establishing a "Regents Ready" cohort for the 2019-20 school year. We will also begin an enrichment program for identified students to engage in preparation for the Specialized High School exam. We are flexibly programming students based on skills and need this year for small group instruction and intervention services. What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? Teachers will provide targeted instruction with a focus on meeting the identified needs of our learners. Our use of I-Ready, Ready and teacher-created assessment data will support this. In addition, teachers will receive support to deliver strategies based on our identified learner-centered problems, and the corresponding problems of practice (teacher pedagogy). How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? Teachers use curricula that supports the use of multiple entry points. Their units of study are continuously revised to identify the strategies that provide access for all learners. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? Our assessment strategy includes: I-Ready, Ready, and teacher-created formative and summative assessments, continuous review of student work using the Datawise protocols, and the Assessment Matters teacher team approach. Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) I-Ready baseline diagnostic all grades I-Ready online adaptive assessment this tool measures students actual learning level all grades Teacher-created unit assessments both formative, and summative assessments all grades Develop a baseline indicator for all students Provide targeted instruction at student's learning level Provide targeted instruction that focuses on developing mastery of standard being taught and assessed 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 22  Ready (paper/pencil) Benchmark, formative all grades Provide real time data on grade level mastery of standards for all students. Use of this data to revise curriculum (i.e. standards that may be reteaching) and to realign intervention groups (Tier 2 & 3) Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, we will increase the percentage of students in ELA achieving at Level 3 from 18% to 24%, increase the percentage of students achieving at Level 4 from 4% to 6%, and decrease the number of students at Level 1 from 38% to 28%, as evidenced by the New York State ELA exam scores. In Math, we will increase the percentage of students achieving at Level 3 from 9% to 18%, increase the percentage of students achieving at Level 4 from 1% to 2%, and decrease the number of students at Level 1 from 67% to 57%, as evidenced by the New York State math exam scores. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Rigorous Instruction, 3-8 ELA and Math Percent Level 2 and above 3-8 Math and ELA SED Growth Percentile, 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 23 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) ELA and Math performance for all students July 2018-June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, literacy and math coaches, teachers Students identified for RTI, AIS and other interventions. How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) *iReady data showing student improvement (moving at least one level) *Ready data showing 10% increase between first and second administration of simulated exam (ELA and Math) Students with Disabilities (SWD) ELA and Math exam performance for SWD subgroup July 2018-June 2019 District instructional support specialist, SWD teachers, ICT teachers and classroom teachers iReady data (SWD subgroups) Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. We will progress monitor for this growth through the use of iReady and classroom data, and data gathered during our Ready (paper/pencil) simulation exams in both ELA and Math. This data will be used to provide small group guided instruction in class and targeted interventions during our ELT, afterschool and Saturday programs. In order to address the needs of our our special education students, the coach will work directly with grade and subject area teams to ensure the units are in alignment with CCLS and informed by data. Lessons will include ways to scaffold instruction to insure multiple entry points for these students. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 24  The Office of English Language Learners (OELL) and the District will provide professional development to support the effective design and delivery of instruction to address the academic and linguistic needs of all English learners. Professional development will be provided to teachers, in differentiated cycles based on teacher need, on: * how to gather authentic data from student work and formal and informal assessments * how to analyze student work and assessment data * how to use this data to drive instructional choices * how to use this data to create guided small group instruction and individualized SDI (Specially-Designed Instruction) Professional development from a consultant from the Center for Educational Innovation (CEI), who provides supports to the first year principal around using data to drive instruction and pedagogical system and structure ENL students (present and former) ELA and Math exam performance for ENL students July 2018-June 2019 ESL and classroom teachers iReady data for ENL subgroups All teachers ELA and Math state exam performance (all students) July 2018-June 2019 Administrators, district team, BFSC personnel and lead teachers Feedback from teachers after every PD workshop. Improvement in Advance Ratings, especially regarding domains 1E and 3D. All teachers ELA and Math state exam performance (all students) July 2018-June 2019 Administrators, teachers Collaborative Teachers Feedback from teachers after every PD workshop. Improvement in Advance Ratings, especially regarding 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 25 All teachers and students ELA and Math state exam performance (all students) July 2018-June 2019 Administrators, district team, BFSC personnel and lead teachers domains 1E and 3D. *iReady data showing student improvement (moving at least one level) *Ready data showing 10% increase between first and second administration of simulated exam (ELA and Math) development, as well as professional development for teachers to increase pedagogical strategies for literacy. This group of teachers includes 1 TIP teacher (Teacher Improvement Plan) and a cohort of teachers who have less than three years of experience. The Go Guardian software will be implemented to provide teachers with the ability to monitor student progress and activity from the teachers' computers. This will also allow teachers and students to communicate 1-1 and in small groups for mandated iReady services to provide live feedback even if teachers and students are in different locations. In addition, additional laptops carts are purchased to provide students and teachers the ability to safely and effectively store laptops. This will streamline distribution and collection of materials in order to provide teachers and students with more instructional time on mandated iReady services. Chromebook chargers are also purchased so that students can use 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 26  laptops being used for mandated iReady work. Provide teachers per session for curriculum planning in April, May and June for tier 1 instruction, as well as tiers 2 and 3 instruction (RTI planning) All teachers ELA and Math state exam performance (all students) July 2018-June 2019 Administrators, teachers Internal feedback survey forms 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent involvement programs will include “Curriculum Nights” and “Academic Parent Teacher Team meetings” to promote literacy/math development at home thus ensuring that teachers and parents think of each other as partners in educating children. Parents will have the opportunity to discuss student progress throughout the school year via our communications on PupilPath and other interim progress reports sent to parents by their child's teachers. Parents will be involved in workshops around topics such as ESSA and Curriculum (additional topics added in response to survey of parental concerns). The workshops will be held during Parent Association meetings, conference evenings and Saturdays. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. ● Master schedule programming to allow two periods a week of common planning time for all teachers ● District staff to provide professional development ● Funding for partner to provide parent outreach programming 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 27  ● Funding for teacher coaches Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February, 2019, 80% of all students will have increased at least one level in their iReady performance (ELA and Math). By February, 2019, the number of students achieving at Level 3/4 will have increased at least 5% in ELA and at least 7% in Math. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Formative i-Ready assessments in ELA and Math, and summative/predictive Ready assessments in ELA and Math. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? One of our school's strength is providing an environment that offers all stakeholders the experiences that are conducive for students’ social and emotional developmental health. Our students are nurtured and supported in a safe and healthy learning environment. There is the expectation that barriers to student success are addressed in order to give students the tools necessary to be more academically successful while developing greater social and emotional health. Our school will continue to focus on all of the following:  Our relationship with our Community School partner, Children’s Aid Society will help address the social-emotional, academic, physical and family components that impede student success.  We are developing systems where all students are connected to a supportive adult through weekly advisory, a robust intake process and a SIT Team approach that looks at students through the prism of guided support and appropriate interventions. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 29  It is the goal of the New Venture School to ensure that all students have the opportunity to have their needs met within a holistic approach. We believe all stakeholders will view the school as a place that celebrates students' talents and strengths, while helping to address their areas requiring additional support. The community will see our school as a place that is supportive and capable of providing targeted help for students and families where and when needed.  With the creation of the DREAM Center supported by CS 219 and Children's Aid Society our students will receive support in social emotional learning, restorative circles, and art therapy. DREAM Movement: Determination, Respect, Empower, Accountability, ME! We are unfolding a PBIS system, creating a matrix for the opportunity to earn Dream Dollars to use for incentives, purchases in the school store, special events. Children’s Aid Society is hiring a Dream / Restorative Justice Coach to facilitate restorative circles and assist the Dean (RJ Coordinator). The goal of our Dream Room is to reflect, restore and return to class.  We have an after school program that supports expanded learning for our 6th graders with Children's Aid Society  We will apply the City Connects model from Children’s Aid Society and Boston College to help us identify which students need extra support. The data from these student surveys will help us tier our students according to their needs in four areas: academic; social emotional; physical well being; and family well-being.  Our success mentors will support the work we have already begun around reducing chronic absenteeism through ongoing outreach and support for our chronically absent students. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner CBO Focus Children's Aid Society Support academic, social-emotional physical and family well-being Support students with STEAM based after school learning opportunities. Directions For Our Youth How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? We will support all of our families with ongoing Social Emotional Learning workshops and professional learning for our staff throughout the school year. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, all teachers and staff will implement the Positive Behaviors Intervention Services (PBIS) system to address students’ social-emotional needs resulting in Level 4 and 5 infractions decreasing from 74 to 60, which represents a 20% decrease, as evidenced by incidents reported in the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS). Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 30 List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Attendance, 3-8 Math and ELA SED Growth Percentile School Survey - Safety 3-8 ELA and Math Percent Level 2 and above 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 31  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Our community school partnership with Children’s Aid Society (CAS), will provide our students additional support on an as need basis and they will also receive services from different providers which are affiliated with CAS. These supports will focus on academics, social-emotional development, family support, and physical well-being. These supports will also be monitored by our school personnel. CAS will work directly with teachers to provide the necessary Professional Development (PD) and guidance in utilizing specific tools to screen students. Professional development opportunities will support teachers’ understanding of the four domains based on whole class and individual assessments. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All at-risk students Performance on SED exams; School Survey - Safety; Attendance data; July 2018 – June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, teachers, CAS Resource Coordinator All classroom teachers Performance on SED exams; July 2018 – June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, teachers, CAS Resource Coordinator School Survey - Safety; Attendance data; How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Monitoring of OORS level 4 and 5 monthly data reports; Monitoring of suspension data; Monitoring of attendance data. Monitoring of OORS level 4 and 5 monthly data reports; Monitoring of suspension data; Monitoring of attendance data. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 32 Targeted at-risk students Performance on SED exams; July 2018 – June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, teachers, CAS Resource Coordinator Attendance data; Parents/Guardians of all students Performance on SED exams; July 2018 – June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, teachers, CAS Resource Coordinator School Survey - Safety; Implementing Community School Model Monitoring of OORS level 4 and 5 monthly data reports; Monitoring of suspension data; Monitoring of attendance data. Monitoring of OORS level 4 and 5 monthly data reports; Monitoring of suspension data; Monitoring of attendance data. CAS will provide additional support for SWDs, ELLs, STH and overage students. Additional staff will provide small group and one on one AIS services. Our success mentors will support our chronically absent students. Parent involvement programs will include “CAS Nights” and “Parents as Partners in learning” to foster stronger relationships thus allowing teachers and parents to think of each other as partners in educating children. For example: ESL classes, affordable housing options for students in temporary housing (STH), assistance with completing food stamps application, assistance with obtaining access to health insurance and mental health assistance, referral to job training. When parents are provided access to information and resources, they have more time to attend parent/teacher conferences and gain knowledge about the academic performance of their child, and will offer an increased parent engagement presence in our school which studies have shown directly correlates 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 33  with student performance and motivation in the classroom. Additional school aides will be in place in order to provide students additional support in continuing to safely transition between classes, to and from lunch, and in and out of the building, in order to maximize instructional time for core classes and RTI. All students School safety benchmark July 2018 – June 2019 Administrators, teachers, students, school aides, Childrens Aid Society Monitoring of OORS level 4 and 5 monthly data reports; Monitoring of suspension data; Monitoring of attendance data. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator will conduct a needs assessment survey to parents to ascertain areas of need/concern regarding their child's social, emotional and academic well-being. Parent workshops will then be created to address these concerns. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.   Funding for Parent Coordinator to provide parent outreach Funding as needed to provide workshops to parents (materials, supplies, etc) Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By January 30, 2019, based on OORS data, there will be a decrease in level 4 and 5 infractions by 10 % in comparison to January 30, 2018. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 34  OORS data Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 35  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed X X X 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Based on our reflections from our IIT review we will focus on the following area. Teachers have been promoting and supporting a greater level of collaboration and collegiality thereby creating more consistency and continuity of instructional practices between classes and grades. Instructional practices are being aligned to CCLS. Tenet 4.2 – School wide instructional practices are being aligned to the instructional focus in order to address school wide academic challenges. ● Students’ academic needs should be addressed as measured by formative and summative data in each lesson. ● Teachers will use data when planning their lessons. Tenet 4.3 – Academic rigor will be a focus in order to support school improvement. ● The level of questioning during daily instruction needs to improve. ● Co-teaching in the ICT classes needs to improve in using the most appropriate of the six methods of collaborative teaching and in demonstrating more purposeful planning using data. Tenet 4.4 – Students need to be more actively engaged in discussions during instructional time. Students need more opportunities to share their perspectives. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 36  ● More critical thinking activities need to happen during classroom instruction. ● The learning environment needs to continually reflect the needs of the diverse learners. Tenet 4.5 – Planning needs to be reflective of identified needs of students through ongoing review of assessment data. Data needs to be used as a tool to provide students with access to learning that meets the learner where they are. ● Assessment tools should be used to support daily lessons as evidenced by planning that supports diversity of learners. ● Instruction is overly reliant on teacher centered approach. ● There needs to be an increase in academic rigor in questioning. Ongoing monitoring of student work needs to be consistent. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? Teachers have the opportunity to collaborate through common planning time (occurring twice weekly). This has been established for the coming school year by content and grade. Teacher teams will focus in the following areas: ● Students learn best through a shared inquiry approach where they are the drivers of the conversation based on their inquiry ● Unit plans will continue to evolve through constant revision based on the needs of students. ● Student work will drive the revisions in lessons and units of study. ● Teachers will continue to tier tasks in order to provide access for all learners in their classrooms. ● Teacher will support risk free environments by making sure to address bullying and respect for all. ● Student work will be reviewed collaboratively and student formative assessment data will be used to guide instruction. ● Teachers will collaborate on inter-disciplinary STEAM units of study. ● All partners will align their instructional support mechanisms and enrichment activities to the instructional units of study of the regular day How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? Teachers meet weekly by grade and content and work directly with a Literacy and math coaches. The Instructional Cabinet (Admin, Coaches and Lead/Model Teachers) meets weekly to ensure coherence across subjects/grades. We also 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 37  are working with Assessment Matters to ensure that PLCs work collaboratively using assessment data to help tailor targeted instruction for all of our learners. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Teacher teams will support one another through ongoing work surrounding unit design, delivery of instruction and revision based on student needs. As teachers receive PD in using integrated technology tools, they will be prepared to utilize the skills needed to support our projected STEAM initiatives. This will include cultural experiences that extend classroom learning in all content areas. As a UA school we are also involved in field trip for our students and their families supporting our science initiatives. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Teachers will establish protocols for examining student work, revising unit plans, conducting lesson study, and sharing best practices that improve student learning. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Data Reviewed Intent I-Ready Progress monitoring and standards mastery Teacher-created assessments Student Work Standards mastery Identify learner-centered problems and investigate corresponding pedagogical problems of practice Ready simulation Standards Mastery (predictive) Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June, 2019, 90% of teachers will have participated in modified Data Wise inquiry cycles that strengthen teachers’ pedagogical practices. As a result, students meeting and exceeding proficiency (Levels 3 and 4) in ELA will increase from 22% to 30%, and students meeting and exceeding proficiency (Levels 3 and 4) in math will increase from 10% to 20%, as evidenced by the New York State ELA and math exam scores. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Collaborative Teachers, 3 - 8 SED Growth Percentile in ELA and Math, 3 - 8 Percent at Level 2 and above in ELA and Math, Rigorous Instruction Performance Index on State ELA Exam 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 38  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 39  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers Collaborative Teachers; Rigorous Instruction; July 2018-June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, teachers. Coaches and lead teachers. All teachers Collaborative Teachers; Rigorous Instruction; July 2018-June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, teachers, coaches and lead teachers. All teachers Collaborative Teachers; Rigorous Instruction; July 2018-June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, teachers, and district support Teacher programs will include common planning time. In grade teams, teachers will analyze data obtained from summative and formative assessments to identify students in need of AIS or enrichment activities. Professional learning supporting implementation of rigorous, CCLS aligned units of study, Engage NY math units, Junior Great Books and STEAM strategies to create inter-disciplinary units. Teq unlimited PD access for all teachers will provide asynchronous PD for teachers in becoming certified in Google Classroom; using Smartboards effectively, promoting one to one learning, Data coach will work directly with grade and subject area teams to ensure that teacher-created assessments and I-Ready/Ready data is being utilized to support progress monitoring. The data coach will help How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in student performance on teacher-created and iReady assessment data. Increase in student performance on teacher-created and iReady assessment data. Increase in student performance on teacher-created and iReady assessment data. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 40  teachers identify targeted students.(ELLs, Level 1 students, SWDs, etc. Parent involvement programs will include workshops to help parents understand the purpose and impact of a data – driven classroom environment. During the months of January to April, a Saturday Academy will be offered to all our at risk students for approximately 4 and a half hours. The Saturday Academies will provide targeted support for at-risk students in ELA and math to remediate their learning deficiencies. In addition, students, teachers and administrators will be in attendance for three days during both the February and April breaks, in order to work on targeted standards-based instruction to prepare for the NYS ELA and math exams. Professional development from a consultant from the Center for Educational Innovation (CEI), who provides supports to the first year principal around using data to drive instruction and pedagogical system and structure development, as well as professional development for teachers to increase pedagogical strategies for literacy. This group of teachers includes 1 TIP All parents and guardians Implementing Community School Model July 2018-June 2019 Administrators, teachers, DFOY and CAS State math and ELA proficiency and growth July 2018-June 2019 Students, teachers, administrators Targeted groups of students in the pushable and slippable categories All teachers State math and ELA proficiency and growth July 2018-June 2019 Administrators, teachers Collaborative Teachers Increase in student performance on teacher-created and iReady assessment data. Increase in proficiency in unit exams and iReady and Ready benchmarks Feedback from teachers after every PD workshop. Improvement in Advance Ratings, especially regarding domains 1E and 3D. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 41  teacher (Teacher Improvement Plan) and a cohort of teachers who have less than three years of experience. Provide teachers per session for curriculum planning in April, May and June for tier 1 instruction, as well as tiers 2 and 3 instruction (RTI planning) All teachers Collaborative teachers July 2018-June 2019 Administrators, teachers Internal feedback surveys 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Coordinator will provide workshops to parents on measures of student learning, including SED assessment data and diagnostic/formative data gleaned from the iReady and Ready assessments. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Programming to allow for common planning time for all teachers ● School and district staff to provide professional development ● Funding for technology to support student one-on-one computing in support of increase of students are and above proficiency ● Funding for personnel to support technology integration. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By January 30, 2019 Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 42  Advance data Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 43  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Based on our reflections from our IIT review we will focus on the following area. Our school leadership needs to ensure that the mission statement and academic goals for the school are understood and clearly articulated by all stakeholders. Instructional practices need to be more consistently monitored, as evidenced by more students being challenged or given more opportunities to develop the necessary skills to become college and career ready. Tenet 2.2 - Our school leadership needs to continue to support and ensure that the school community shares the SMART goals/ mission, and long term vision and priorities established in the SCEP. The mission and goals of the school need to be prominently visible throughout the school and clearly articulated by all stakeholders. ● The classrooms need to reflect a data driven approach to teaching and learning. ● The school’s SMART SCEP goals need to be understood by all stakeholders. Tenet 2.4 – Our use of the observation tools needs to be more consistent. Every staff member needs to be held accountable for continuous school improvement. ● Feedback needs to be timely. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 44  ● Recommendations for improvement in observation reports need to be time bound. ● PD strategies identified to improve student learning need to be implemented and monitored more consistently. ● Monitoring of teachers’ practices needs to be consistent in order to hold all staff accountable for continuous school improvement. Tenet 2.5 - The use of data in our school needs to be more evident and organic. Teacher analysis of data should be shared with students regularly in order to ensure greater understanding of skill mastery and skill deficiencies as they relate to the CCLS. ● Data needs to be used to adjust instructional practices in order to meet the needs of specific subgroups. ● Data needs to be used to improve learning outcomes by implementing the most effective instructional strategies. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? One of the goals of Effective School Leadership is to ensure that the voices of the school community resonate with a clear understanding of the shared mission, vision and instructional focus of the school. The constituents of the school community should feel that school leadership is willing to listen to their voices and consider how a unimpeded flow of ideas can support the growth and evolution of a school community. Effective School Leadership takes on the following characteristics as it focuses on school improvement: ● The entire school community should have the opportunity to see, hear and share the vision and mission multiple times over the course of the school year. ● CBO partnerships will strengthen only through constant progress monitoring and a clear understanding of what the deliverable are. ● CBO partnerships must provide the social emotional support for schools through clear and agreed upon strategies that focus on meeting the needs of the whole child. ● Data collection tools that measure attendance, suspension data, academic performance, etc. will help school leaders collect evidence to determine if a specific approach a CBO is using is working. ● School teams need to meet on a regular time frame to continue to revisit strategies being used to support the community school model. ● A school leadership retreat will be organized to support leadership development for all stakeholders. ● School leaders will attend two professional development conferences per year. ● Student and teacher programs need to align in order to support academic, remedial, enrichment and STEAM initiatives. Resources would have to be earmarked to support school initiatives that support academic and social-emotional progress. ● Clearly established observation and feedback cycles would be implemented in order to support teacher development. ● Professional learning cycles would also be established to support teacher development. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 45 ● All data will be shared with the school community through the use of effective and agreed upon data dissemination tools. Information will be gathered and progress will be monitored through weekly and monthly data meetings. ● The assistant principals will be responsible for managing teams of teachers and all the areas in which these teams function. They will also be responsible for managing the student body attached to their specific teams. ● The community school director will be responsible for coordinating all resources available to the school community. On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? I plan on providing a clear vision and clear expectations for my team What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? I will provide continuous communication reflecting on our shared understanding of what will make our school more successful. these beliefs will be shared discussed and articulated in PD presentations, team meetings, observation feedback, weekly newsletters, etc. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? We will identify leaders in each content area, such as math and literacy coaches, grade team leaders, etc. All teachers who attend PD will have opportunities to share the best practices received from outside PD. We have identified team members for our Data Wise Model School work. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? We will have monthly SLT meetings providing the opportunity for all stakeholders to have their voices heard. The decision making will include all stakeholders including two student representatives. How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy Regular observations occur daily, Advance observations will occur a minimum of once per month. Feedback will be shared within 48 hours We will revisit classrooms within two weeks of feedback to ensure implementation of recommendations - This will occur after teacher has received initial support as indicated in feedback. What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 46  Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) I-Ready data To identify students areas needing support Teachers, coaches and admin Teacher-created assessments and student work samples To identify learner centered problem , problem of practice, and action plan Teachers, coaches and admin Ready data To assess progress toward mastery of standards Teachers, coaches, admin How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? Teachers will have common planning time and students will have AIS programming built into their programs. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, 90% of the pedagogical staff will have been observed a minimum of 3 times in components 3b: Using Questioning and Discussion, 3c: Engagement and 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction which will be evidenced by an overall rating of Effective in Domain 3, Instruction as indicated in the Measures of Teacher Practice (MoTP) ratings in Advance. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Rigorous Instruction 3-8 ELA and Math SED Growth Percentiles 3-8 ELA and Math Percent at Level 2 and above 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 47 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers Rigorous Instruction July 2018-June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, coaches, teachers How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Advance data All teachers Rigorous Instruction July 2018-June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, coaches, teachers Advance data ESL teachers and Classroom teachers of ELL students Rigorous Instruction July 2018-June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, ESL teachers coaches, OELL and district support Advance data Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Teachers will be supported through an ongoing PD cycle that identifies strategies and supports necessary to improve questioning strategies. An instructional coach will work directly with grade and subject area teams to ensure the classroom activities and tasks are goal oriented, and in alignment with CCLS and informed by data. Office of English Language Learners (OELL), the district, Borough Field Support Centers will provide professional development on the SIOP Model to design and deliver lessons that address the academic and linguistic needs of English learners. Parent involvement programs will include “Parents as Partners in learning” to Parents/Guardians of SWDs, ELLs, at-risk students, GE students Implementing Community School Model July 2018-June 2019 Administrators, teachers, DFOY, and CAS Parent feedback 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 48  promote literacy development and awareness of school’s mission/goals thus ensuring that teachers and parents think of each other as partners in educating children. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. TBD Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Programming to allow for common planning time for all teachers ● OELL and district staff to provide professional development ● Funding for partner to provide parent outreach programming Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title I 1003(a) X Title III X PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By December 2018, school leadership will revise professional development plan that supports teacher growth in using higher order questioning strategies as evidenced by an increase in teachers moving one level in Danielson 3B discussion and questioning techniques and 3C Engaging Students in Learning. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance data Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 49  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Based on our reflections from our IIT review we will focus on the following area. Our school engages in regular communication with students and families that encourages and promotes high expectations for academic growth. Our relationships with community partners, particularly our new Community School designation with Children’s Aid Society, will continue to foster our strengthening relationship with the community’s stakeholders. Tenet 6.2 – Our school promotes regular communication with families fostering high expectations for all.  ● Skedula is a tool that promotes ongoing communication.  ● The more informed parents are, the more encouraged they are to become active members in support of the school’s goals and mission. Tenet 6.3 – Reciprocal communication has helped the school community to foster a strong relationship with parents. ● It is evident that the open and mutually respectful partnership between home and school enables families to support their child’s development. Tenet 6.4 – There are partnerships between the school and community agencies promoting social and emotional developmental health to support student success. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 50  ●Our community partnerships are strengthening a relationship where students are nurtured, respected, recognized for their talents and supported as they address weaknesses. ●Professional development helps staff to establish and sustain productive relationships and partnerships with parents, which helps our staff acquire a more comprehensive understanding of each child’s needs. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? It is incumbent upon our school, New Venture Community School – The STEAM Academy to provide an environment that is parent friendly, where parent voice is integral and woven into the school fabric. It is our goal through the community school model to provide all parents with access to the support structures needed to level the playing field in order for our students to be successful. ● It is the responsibility of all school community members from school safety to custodial staff to make our school a welcoming place where everyone is accepted. This will require ongoing professional learning for all stakeholders. ● Our school will host quarterly curriculum nights where parents can receive curricular supports in order to give their children the support from home that will help foster the home-school connection. ● We will be hosting orientation events for our incoming students where both parents and students will be surveyed to help us identify student and parent interests. ● We will have a parent resource center where parents and families can access technology and resources. ● We will be providing ESL classes, GED classes, job readiness and resume writing classes. ● Families will be able to access and understand student data and progress through online assessment tools. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? We have created a family Engagement Center which provides resources for our parents - It is led by our parent Coordinator and our Americorp Family Engagement Liaison. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? We will provide opportunities for parents to become Learning Leaders and be part of SLT How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 51  This will occur through ongoing parent workshops and family engagement activities including our use of the APTT process for family and students engagement What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale Workshops Learning Leaders ESL and GED Classes Parent support of students Parent support of school Parent education How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: This occurs through the work of the Parent Coordinator and the Family Engagement Center. Family partnerships with CBO: This occurs through CAS office Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Yes. We have established a Family Engagement Center where we hold workshops and events for our families. What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? We are providing ESL and GED classes What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? Parents will receive ongoing progress reports, APTT meetings, parent teacher conferences and meetings by appointment. Additionally there will be ongoing and constant communication via Skedula. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, the school will narrow the gap between the school and the district in Strong-Family Communities-Ties by increasing the average score from 3.13 to 3.26 for that element, as measured by the NYC School Learning Environment survey. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 52  List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Implementing Community Schools Model; Performance on SED ELA and Math exam School Survey - Culture and Safety 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 53 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers and students Implementing Community School Model; School Survey - Safety; September 2017 – June 2018 Principal, assistant principals, teachers, CAS Resource Coordinator How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Attendance Data; School Survey - Culture; All teachers and students Implementing Community School Model; School Survey - Safety; September 2017 – June 2018 Principal, assist. principals, CAS Resource Coordinator School Survey - Culture; All students Implementing Community School Model; School Survey - Safety; September 2017 – June 2018 Principal, assistant principals, teachers, CAS Resource Coordinator Attendance Data; School Survey - Culture; Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. In grade teams, teachers will analyze data obtained from screening tools to help identify students in need of additional resources in the quadrants of academic, social-emotional, physical, or family well-being. The Children’s Aid Society (CAS) will provide professional development on the City connect Model to support student success in the four quadrants mentioned above. Student engagement programs will include more curriculum to support the arts and sciences through our STEAM initiative. We will also be implementing Friday afternoon enrichment clubs to support greater levels of student engagement. We will also offer “Success in learning” classes to promote literacy and math development 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 54  at home thus ensuring that students take ownership of their own achievements and successes Parent involvement programs will include events and workshops to support greater understanding of the types of support being offered through the Community School relationship. We will host monthly opportunities to provide families with a road map of our school’s vision. Parents/Guardians of SWDs, ELLs, other at-risk students, and GE students Implementing Community School Model; School Survey - Safety; September 2017 – June 2018 Administrators, Teachers, DFOY, Children’s Aid Society Attendance Data; Parent feedback forms; School Survey - Culture; Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Programming to allow for common planning time for all teachers ● Children’s Aid Society as a community partner Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By January 30 2019, 100% of all stakeholders including families, the school community members, and school staff, will be knowledgeable about effective ways in which we will be able to further support the academic and social needs of our students and their families. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 55  School Survey, particularly sections on Culture and on Safety Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 56  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, during our Expanded Learning Time, our school will provide high-quality educational and enrichment programs to all students as measured by a 10% increase in academic achievement. We will provide high-quality educational and enrichment programs that will enable participants to improve academically,encourage positive behavior and appropriate social interaction with peers and adults. These activities will take place everyday afterschool for approximately 1 and half hours a day. During the months of January to April, a Saturday Academy will be offered to all our at risk students for approximately 4 and a half hours. The Saturday Academies will provide targeted support for at-risk students in ELA and math to remediate their learning deficiencies. In addition, students, teachers and administrators will be in attendance for three days during both the February and April breaks, in order to work on targeted standards-based instruction to prepare for the NYS ELA and math exams. Some enrichment programs that will be offered are as follows: Robotics, Comic Book Club, and Go Chefs, which will enable our at-risk and grade-level performing students to improve their core subject understanding through hands-on and connected learning strategies,. These programs will also encourage positive and appropriate interaction with peers and adults and allow them to acquire skills necessary to be college and career readiness. Additional programs will be added as needed. New Venture students who regularly attend the New Venture Community University (NVCU) will meet or exceed the state standards in reading and mathematics. · At least 50% of regularly attending students will show a 10% growth as measured by grades and/or test scores.· At least 70% of regularly attending students will increase student participation as evidenced by classroom discussions, student teacher conferences and student engagement. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 57  New Venture Community School will also provide activities which will increase parental involvement and opportunities for literacy and related educational development for the family members of all participating students. New Venture Community School will also provide parents the opportunity to visit all enrichment activities during the current school year. · We will offer 100% of parents the opportunity to participate in parent programs including those offered by our school and community partners, as evidenced by program schedules and flyers/letters to parents. All Extended Learning will be monitored throughout the school year utilizing the following: quarterly iReady assessments, student interviews, classroom observations, and academic portfolio reviews for progress or lack of progress. ELT is being stream lined to support students more directly based on data. *Small group instruction is designed to target instruction through station teaching. Community School 219 is collaborating with CEI to build the STEAM program around Robotics, the Benchmark Art Program, Theatre Works, Technology Intern Program, and other various programs facilitated by internal staff . A grant was received for the Mentoring in Medicine Program starting in Spring 2019 with Montefiore Hospital. In addition, students who need paraprofessionals are provided with the support for after school AIS and ELT. Paraprofessionals are provided with per session, since this activity takes place outside of normal school hours. For technology, the Go Guardian software will be implemented to provide teachers with the ability to monitor student progress and activity from the teachers' computers. This will also allow teachers and students to communicate 1-1 and in small groups for mandated iReady services to provide live feedback even if teachers and students are in different locations. In addition, additional laptops carts are purchased to provide students and teachers the ability to safely and effectively store laptops. This will streamline distribution and collection of materials in order to provide teachers and students with more instructional time on mandated iReady services. Chromebook chargers are also purchased so that students can use laptops being used for mandated iReady work. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Recruitment: We have an excellent rapport with our students and their families and have developed a high quality Expanded Learning Time program for them. We will build on these relationships to recruit students and their parents; in particular, we will work with our teachers and school staff to promote and encourage participation. Our outreach will include: ● Bilingual flyers to all students’ families, ● Announcements on a school’s public address system, 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 58  ● Use of the School Messenger communication system which sends direct phone messages to parents, ● Staff presentations at student assemblies, back-to-school nights, Parent Teacher Organization and, and other open house events ● Staff presentations at school staff meetings ● Bilingual posters in the schools and neighborhoods Although NVCU will be open to all students at New Venture, we will focus on recruiting students who meet any of the following criteria: absenteeism, disruptive behavior in class, poor academic record, and/or a history of family struggles. Based on student interest and high need, we expect full enrollment. Retention: Our main tool to assure retention will be a mix of high quality activities that students enjoy, making them want to come to NVCU each day. We will give students “choice and voice” by allowing them to select activities, and provide them opportunities to periodically change activities and try new classes. We will look to our students and School Leadership Team to help us design and refine a menu of activities that students will enjoy for its own sake. We will also reach out to parents and school day staff to get their input as to which activities students would enjoy. We will periodically survey students, parents and program staff to learn which activities are working, which need to be improved, and for recommendations of new activities. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? We have realized that there is strength when there is a partnership of individuals and groups who have a common vision, a shared set of values, and a uniting force. It has become abundantly clear to our organization that we need the community stakeholders to see how we can work together to bring the support structures so urgently needed by our students and families. The barriers to success are far too high for many of our students who live in Morrisania. We 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 59  need to make sure that our students and families have the access to the resources to keep them healthy, socially and emotionally sound, united, and most importantly, well-educated and prosperous. We believe that the most critical tool to overcoming the disadvantages faced by our students is a college education, in preparation for a solid career. However, most individuals in Morrisania have little experience with college. This community is characterized by extreme levels of poverty, falling within the nation’s poorest Congressional District (NY-16) and low levels of educational achievement – only 7% of community residents have a college degree. We plan to change that. We have developed New Venture Community University (NVCU) to teach our students that college is for them. Our goal is to create a college-bound mentality among our students and families; - we want to immerse them in a collegiate atmosphere. Thus NVCU is structured to emulate the college experience. NVCU will develop Course Offering Brochures from which students will select their classes. The registration process will mirror college registration. There will be mandated courses (i.e. everyone must take at least one academic class every day and all students must participate in STEAM activities), distribution requirements (students must enroll in a mix of activities), and students will accrue credits. Each year students will visit a college campus, and we will recruit program staff who can speak about the college experience. Parent classes will also have a university structure, with parents earning credits and working towards a “graduate” certificate. In July 2018, New Venture Academy continued the planning and implementation of the Community School Strategy. In using the Community Schools Strategy, a major component will be to implement high quality expanded learning time programming. This will offer an opportunity for New Venture Academy students and their families to be connected to the education, health, and safety supports they need to thrive in a disadvantaged community. We selected Option 1 which did not require an SBO for our Renewal Hour schedule. Teachers will either work periods 1-8 or 2-9. This will be a staggered schedule where teachers will have PD during Monday morning or Monday afternoon. We will focus our ELT efforts on developing and implementing Theme Based Programming and Inquiry-based Learning approach. NVCU will operate around the theme of Science, Technology, Engineering Art and Math (STEAM). Inquiry-based Learning: NVCU activities will be designed to engage all participants in active learning by asking them questions that spark their interest, guide them deeper into the study of a topic, and promote higher-order thinking skills. Our activities will be experiential, interactive, hands-on, learner-directed and related to real world, but also linked to academic aims. Students will work together to pose questions and solve problems, rather than receiving direct instructions on what to do from a teacher. We will provide training to all of our instructors on how to implement inquiry-based learning. They will learn the 3 steps of planning for an inquiry-based project: 1) Pre-planning: Teachers determine any limiting factors such amount of time, or number of sessions. 2) Brainstorming: To find out student interests, teachers start a class discussion using broad questions. 3) Questioning: A topic is selected, and teachers ask students what they would like to know about the topic, mapping questions on a curriculum wheel. 4) Teachers will also learn how to guide students through the four stages of inquiry-based learning: posing real questions, finding relevant resources, interpreting information and reporting findings. We have selected this theme because of the need to involve more minority students in these critical and fast-growing areas. According to the US Department of Labor, employment in STEM jobs is projected to grow by 34 percent, adding about 2.7 million new jobs by 2018. Employment in management, scientific, and technical consulting services is anticipated to expand at a staggering 83 percent. Most STEM jobs are extremely well-paid; for example, the median salary of computer scientists is $97,970, while the median salaries of mathematicians and engineers are $95,150 and $82,483, respectively. Unfortunately, few minorities are engaged in STEM professions. According to a 2009 study by the Institute for Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), over 78% of workers in STEM fields are white males, with other ethnic groups represented as follows: Ethnicity White Black Hispanic Asian Others All STEM 78.4% 6.4% 1.8% 12.7% 0.7% 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 60  To increase the number of minority youth qualified to pursue careers in STEM fields, we have developed a comprehensive curriculum consisting of a progression of inquiry-based STEM classes, which are detailed in the chart below. They include: STEM 101: 21 Century Afterschool Science Project STEM 102: Science faction Summer Program STEM 201, 202, 203: Application Development STEM 301: Aeronautics STEM 302: Robotics: STEM 401: Environmental Education STEM 402: STEM Field Trips An important adjunct to our STEM classes is our college prep activities. While students are receiving content- based instruction in STEM, they will also be exposed to colleges that offer STEM instruction, and learn how to build their high school resumes maximizing their chances of admission. Although we will provide STEM theme based programs, we will work to offer a wide range of activities to include the interest of the students we serve. We have looked at the following program activities: Performing & Visual Arts 101, 201, 301: Arts For Kids ( will provide artist residency programs, performance assemblies and parent and teacher development training workshops. ● African Drumming ● African Dance ● Brazilian/South American Drumming ● Brazilian Capoiera Dance ● Asian Drumming/Instrument Making ● Asian Dance ● Hip Hop Electronic Music Creation & Technology ● Poetry Slam ● Mural Making ● Multicultural Chorus ● Drama 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 61  ● Mask Making and/or Sculpture Each activity will end with a culminating project or performance. Fitness 101: To engage students and parents in active living now, and help set a pattern for their future, the Coordinated Approach to Child Health (CATCH) Kids Club, an evidence-based program that provides materials and curricula to develop health-related fitness, skill competency and cognitive understanding about the importance of physical activity. It includes aerobic games, rhythm games, parachute, basketball, soccer, jump rope, and flying disc, and games designed for limited space; it also offers the Kids Club Nutrition program, designed to educate students about food choices and help them develop healthy eating habits. Fitness 201: To encourage healthy eating we will offer culinary arts to our students. Culinary Arts provides an opportunity for students learn to eat a variety of foods and appropriate portions. This culinary arts program encourages healthier eating habits by introducing the students to cooking vegetables and using whole grain products. Parent University 101: We have developed a college framework and set of course offerings for parents. Parent U will provide three strands of workshops: 1) Parenting (examples: Managing Behavior Through Positive Discipline; Internet and Cyber Safety; Gang Awareness) 2) Personal Enrichment (examples: Citizenship; ESL; Job Searching; Building Your Resume) and 3) Technology (examples: Financial Literacy and Computer Basics; Microsoft Word). Some of these activities will be offered in Spanish. Parents will receive one “credit” for each workshop hour. Parents who accumulate 30 credits will be awarded a Certificate. Parent U 201: To develop their capacity as leaders and to engage them in their children’s education, parents will be invited to participate in the School Leadership Team, where they will support the development activities, assess performance, set future goals and aid with sustainability planning and activities. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. We have developed tremendous relationships with our CBO partners at New Venture Academy School Community; The Children’s Aid Society and Directions For Our Youth. We would like to deepen these partnerships through the NVCU program with more intentional planning, coordination and effective communication with all stakeholders; the school leadership, instructional staff, parents and our valuable community partners. We can develop an aligned vision, staffing plan and menu of activities that complement the school day. Administrators and other key school day staff have been engaged but deepening the process with an Advisory Board. In addition, we have developed a variety of other tools to cement a seamless connection between school and expanded learning time, including: a. Joint Staffing: All of our academic remediation programs and many of our enrichment activities will be led by school day teachers. Experienced professionals, these teachers can link afterschool to school day programs, while making them hands-on and engaging. b. Joint Professional Development: NVCU staff and school day staff will attend a variety of professional development workshops together. By learning the same materials and strategies, the two staffs can help align their activities, while also getting to know one another and developing mutual respect. We are also going to approach school day teachers to serve as coaches and role models for expanded learning time staff. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 62  c. Communication Methods: NVCU staff will meet with school administrators, key staff and school leadership team on a regular basis to ensure that school and after-school continue to reinforce each other. We will also deliver on-going information about NVCU to the school, including program schedules, newsletters, invitation to recognition events, and trip plans. We will provide dedicated time for program and school staff to communicate and connect, helping them develop relationships of mutual respect and understanding. d. Team Approach: We will send out materials co-signed by Program Directors and Principals, indicating to parents that school and expanded learning time are a team. We will also attend PTA meetings, parent-teacher conferences and school-day events to emphasize our relationship with the schools. School day staff will be welcomed to our program at all times, and will be particularly encouraged to attend Recognition Ceremonies to celebrate the achievements of the children we share. e. Complementary Programming: NVCU activities have been designed to complement and expand on school-day activities for a holistic approach to youth development and school success. We work with the school’s curriculum, and will provide NVCU students with the ability to pursue in-depth a subject that was touched upon during the school day. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 1. This program’s development and implementation will be ongoing from June 2017 through June 2018. This program will run from September 2018-June 2019. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Ongoing planning and support for the school’s ELT planning team consisting of: the instructional leaders, ELT teachers, CBO partners and community members. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. X 21st Century Title I 1003(a) Tax Levy Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks By January 30, 2019 we will achieve a registration percentage of 80% of our goal. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will measure student success using the I-Ready assessment tool Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 63  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. As a community school, New Venture Academy will implement a multi-tiered approach to program evaluation that will correspond with our goals of: 1) Improving academic achievement, as evidenced by a greater percentage of students performing at or above grade level in ELA and Math and an increase in grade promotion rates; 2) Improving school culture and climate, as evidenced by higher student attendance and a decrease in incidents and suspensions; 3) Improving the physical and socio-emotional well-being of students, as evidenced by an increase in connection to health services based on identified need and improvement in SEL strengths. The following chart illustrates the indicators to be tracked corresponding with each goal, the data sources, and the timeline for obtaining evaluation deliverables, and demonstrating CAS’ commitment to quantitative performance metrics including 1) growth in student achievement, 2) graduation (when relevant) and attendance rates, 3) growth in areas of school culture and climate, and 4) evidence of improvement in student health and socio-emotional well-being: Goal Quantitative Performance Metrics Improve Academic Achievement Student Grades: State Assessments: Improve School Culture and Climate Grade Promotion: Attendance: Incidents: Suspensions: Data/ Assessment Sources NYS ELA and Math scores Report cards School promotion data School attendance records CAS targeted tracking School incident data School suspension data Timeline Annual Marking Periods Annual Weekly Annual Annual Improve Student Physical and Socio-Emotional Well-Being Identified health and socio-emotional needs with connection to service: CCNX SSIS Bi-Annual Contributing to this multi-tiered approach is the incorporation of data and reports generated by the school and/or NYC DOE that reflect the entire school population, data specific to the CCNX model, and data correlated with specific targeted interventions delivered by CAS: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 64  School-wide data and reporting will include test scores, attendance, grade promotion, and graduation rates as made available by school leadership through real-time data and reports including the: Progress Report which provides grades for student progress, student performance, school environment and closing the achievement gap; the Learning Environment Survey which assigns a score for academic expectations, communication, engagement and safety and respect and serves as a tool for strategizing ways to make the school a better place for learning; New York State Report Card , which captures student demographic information, attendance and suspensions, and school performance with respect to the percentage of students scoring at or above grade level in ELA, Math and Science; and the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) which outlines school goals and progress toward meeting those goals. CCNX to collect student information including individual student plans based on identified needs and appropriate service referrals. To permit streamlined tracking and follow-up, City Connects (CCNX) has developed a proprietary Web-based database, Student Support Information System (SSIS). SSIS will allow for secure collection of data on student reviews, individual student plans, service referrals, and providers (both school-based and community agencies) who will deliver services. SSIS data will be used for three purposes: 1) record-keeping at the individual and school level; 2) monitoring and evaluating the implementation of the intervention throughout the school year; and 3) conducting research on the effectiveness of the intervention. The tailoring of services will be accomplished through different combinations of quantity and type of services, which will result in a unique set of services for each student. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve TBD TBD TBD Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Children's Aid Society All students with focus on Grade 6 Directions for Our Youth Student Council TBD Grade 7 and 8 Student leaders TBD academic, social emotional and physical well being support academic and enrichment support Building student voice TBD Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. 2. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 65  3. 4. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. The Instructional Cabinet will meet weekly to progress monitor school-wide goals. The SIT will meet twice a month to case monitor individual students. Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students With CAS as our CBO partner, we proposed to advance our efforts by partnering with City Connects (CCNX), a school-based intervention that leverages the services and resources of community and city organizations to optimize student support. At the core of this model is a survey that assesses the strengths and needs of student in four key areas of children’s development. Having after school or health services available to students is simply not enough to assure their success when faced with poverty-induced community obstacles; there must also be a comprehensive system of individual student needs assessment and resource connection. Otherwise, the students with the greatest need are often left unidentified or unengaged. By assessing the needs of each individual child in the school, we will be addressing a critical concern within our current school community. which has been limited by resources available to efficiently assess each student to ensure that the right students are getting the right services at the right time. A broader set of services and other providers are critical to this initiative so that students are connected with the resources they need to thrive. Founded as a project of Boston College’s Center for Optimized Student Support, CCNX has demonstrated a high-impact, cost-effective model. The model includes seven key components that align well with the CAS community school framework: 1) Community School Director : The Director will work closely with the principals and all other stakeholders – students, parents, school staff, community members, and other providers – to plan and implement program strategies. Working in close partnership with the principals, the Director will facilitate collaborative planning between school leaders and other service providers, to ensure the program’s alignment with set goals. 2) Student Resource Coordinator. At the core of the intervention is a full-time Coordinator, trained as a school counselor or school social worker, who connects students to a customized set of services through collaboration with families, teachers, school staff, and community agencies. 3) Whole Class Review. The Coordinator works closely with each classroom teacher to review all students in the class and develop customized support plans that address their individual strengths and needs. 4) Individual Student Review. Students identified as having intensive needs, at any point during the school year, receive an Individual Student Review (ISR). This review is independent and distinct from a Special Education referral. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 66  A wider team of professionals (i.e., principal, school psychologist, nurse, social worker) then discuss and develop specific measurable goals and strategies for the student. The Coordinator communicates with the family before and after the ISR. 5) Community Agency Partnerships. A critical aspect of the role of the SRC is developing and maintaining partnerships with community agencies and institutions that can provide supports and services to children and their families. Additionally, CAS has worked extensively with other public, non-profit and private partners to create a web of safety and support for children. Partnerships with educational entities, health care providers, arts and literacy organizations, and youth development organizations enrich services for youth in our community school programs. 6) Connecting Students to Services, Tracking, and Follow Up. During and after the conversations with teachers, school staff and leaders, and community agency representatives, the SRC connects the student to the particular enrichment and service programs that best meet his or her strengths and needs. The SRC works closely with families as students are referred and connected to particular enrichment's and services. To aid with the process, and to permit streamlined tracking and follow-up, CCNX has developed a proprietary Web-based database, Student Support Information System (SSIS). 7) Providing Specific Services in the School. In response to specific needs, the SRC also provides the following services within the school and classrooms: 1) leading small social skills groups on a time-limited basis that addresses focused topics such as making friends, bullying, and healthy eating; 2) crisis intervention for individual or small groups of children; 3) family outreach and support addressing specific family needs that are impacting the child’s performance in school. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. 1. Weekly meetings for Community School Team consisting of Principal, assistant principal, teachers, parent coordinator, parents, CBO partners, faith-based partners, corporate partners and community members. 2. Parent coordinator’s planning and hosting of parent and community events. 3. Staff attendance at student celebration and recognition events throughout the school year Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 1. The program implementation began in the spring or 2015. It will continue for the next 4 years with a completion date of June 2019 . Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 67  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who score below proficiency levels on NYS Assessments will receive additional support. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) School –day tutoring, Expanded-day Academic Intervention, Saturday Academy Really Great Reading was ordered and implemented as a way to group students for AIS. Through the Really Great Reading program, students were diagnosed and then placed in various groups, such as Blast and Boost, which allows teachers to target them on their reading levels. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Whole class, small group, one on one, tutoring During the school day, after school, Saturdays Smart Start tutors were brought in to work with small groups of students to remediatestudents on standards on which they were struggling. For technology, the Go Guardian software will be implemented to provide teachers with the ability to monitor student progress and activity from the teachers' computers. This will also allow teachers and students to communicate 1-1 and in small groups for mandated iReady services to provide live feedback even if teachers and 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 68  Mathematics Students who score below proficiency levels on NYS Assessments will receive additional support School –day tutoring, Expanded-day Academic Intervention, Saturday Academy students are in different locations. In addition, additional laptops carts are purchased to provide students and teachers the ability to safely and effectively store laptops.This will streamline distribution and collection of materials in order to provide teachers and students with more instructional time on mandated iReady services. Chromebook chargers are also purchased so that students can use laptops being used for mandated iReady work. Whole class, small group, one on one, tutoring Smart Start tutors were brought in to work with small groups of students to remediatestudents on standards on which they were struggling. For technology, the Go Guardian software will be implemented to provide teachers with the ability to monitor student progress and activity from the During the school day, after school, Saturdays 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 69  Science Students who score below proficiency levels on NYS Assessments will receive additional support 2018-19 RSCEP-PF School –day tutoring, Expanded-day Academic Intervention, Saturday Academy teachers' computers. This will also allow teachers and students to communicate 1-1 and in small groups for mandated iReady services to provide live feedback even if teachers and students are in different locations. In addition, additional laptops carts are purchased to provide students and teachers the ability to safely and effectively store laptops.This will streamline distribution and collection of materials in order to provide teachers and students with more instructional time on mandated iReady services. Chromebook chargers are also purchased so that students can use laptops being used for mandated iReady work. Whole class, small group, one on one, tutoring Provide teachers per session for curriculum planning in April, May and June for tier 1 instruction, as well as tiers 2 and 3 During the school day, after school, Saturdays 70 instruction (RTI planning) Whole class, small group, one on one, tutoring Provide teachers per session for curriculum planning in April, May and June for tier 1 instruction, as well as tiers 2 and 3 instruction (RTI planning) Individual/Group, Peer During the school day, after school, Saturdays During the school day, after school, Saturdays Social Studies Students who score below proficiency levels of school based assessments will receive additional support School –day tutoring, Expanded-day Academic Intervention, Saturday Academy At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Counseling, conflict resolution, peer mediation Students who have observable behaviors that are detrimental to self and others receive services. Additionally, students who have experienced traumatic events in their lives also receive services Students who need paraprofessionals are provided with the support for after school AISand ELT. Paraprofessionals are provided with per session, since this activity takes place outside of normal school hours. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 71  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 20 percent of our students 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will offer additional in school support through enrichment and social emotional support Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 72  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 73  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. School administration and the hiring committee will work with DHR to ensure that all teachers are highly qualified, form partnerships with local colleges to identify new staff and attend Central borough wide hiring fairs. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Promote and support the work of the Professional learning team in its selection and implementation of professional development that supports the goals of the school through the lens of the instructional focus. ● Promote and facilitate CCLS aligned student work that reflects the implementation of current system-wide reform initiatives. ● Integrate professional development for monolingual and bilingual/ESL staff into the ongoing instructional activities of the school, for example, through multidisciplinary planning, common preparation periods, and locally designed professional support. ● Involve parents in their children's education through greater collaboration with teachers and other school staff, and increased engagement in the school's education program. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 74  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. MOSL Team, Grade level teams, curriculum team, and professional development team use multiple sources to demonstrate the ability to understand and analyze data to inform instructional practices. These groups use data to identify student learning trends, set goals, modify and monitor instruction, and increase student achievement. Teacher teams use LASW protocols to identify strengths and learning gaps. This process helps teachers to identify student learning gaps. Professional development on using assessment tools, i.e. skedula to create data driven classroom assessments that itemize and identify the learning targets. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 75 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Federal Federal 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 359,110.00  Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local 0 14,216.00 0 2,559,155.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 76  purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 77  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. I.S. 219, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. [New Venture Community School – The STEAM Academy] will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 78  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 79  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) C.S. 219, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 80  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 81  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 82  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 83  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 84  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 85  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 3 2 1 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: There are currently 314 students at MS219X of which 98 are ELLs. A demographic analysis of the ELL population indicates that 61 of these ELLs have less then 3 years of ELL instructional services. It is our goal that these ELL's will advance one proficiency level. For this reason, we have identified and targeted our newcomers with supplementary instruction during Saturday Academy. Grade 0-3 Years of Service 6 18 7 12 8 21 Total 51 Access- focuses on the big ideas in English through high-interest lessons in literature, writing, reading, and grammar; supports and scaffolds different levels of language proficiency while teaching core English content; provides oral language activities; complements classroom curriculum and builds academic vocabulary; offers step-by-step models and a highly visual design to make content more accessible for ELLs. The content area teacher along with the ESL and bilingual teachers will conduct one on one conferencing to assess progress, provide clarification and differentiate based on students needs and will be using EDAT estimator tool to determine student deficiency and areas of improvement. They will track student progress and help teachers with next steps. •ESL strategies will be utilized for support in comprehension in all 3 subject-areas. •NYSESLAT-Additional experiences/test practices in the four modalities: *Speaking: Graphic information *Listening: Picture/sentence comprehension: dialogue & academic content *Reading: Picture identification with simple question; short passages for comprehension *Writing: Descriptive paragraphs, fact-based essays The language of instruction is English. The 3-hour Saturday session is scheduled for 9am-12noon for approximately 12 weeks from November 2016- April 2017 and will be divided as follow: NYSESLAT test prep (1 hour), Language Arts (1 hour) and Math (1 hour)., conducted by 3 Bilingually licensed (Spanish- English) teachers. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 86  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The school’s professional development program for Title III program teachers (bilingual teacher and content teacher) as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to these targeted immigrant students will include the following PD focus: •Promoting Academic Excellence for All Language Learners presented by Betzaida Franco, (RBERN ELL Specialist) on from 2:20-3:40pm, date to be determined. • ELL Student Data presented by Ivan De Jesus Assistant Principal at MS 219X. • The bilingual ESL coordinator will continue to attend ongoing PD's and turn key to the staff during faculty conferences and grade/subject weekly meetings. The ESL coordinator attends monthly professional developments presented by the network at Mercy College), which provides useful information that can be used for the ELL students. This information will also be turned key. The ELL coordinator will also continue to provide staff with PD opportunities and ELL strategies for vocabulary building. Future dates to be announced by the network. • All of our teachers are kept informed of other professional development opportunities focusing on second language acquisition, effective ELL strategies and methodologies. •Differentiated instruction Focus for ELLs: , RBERN will observe, model and conference on December with Grade 6,7& 8 Bilingual Teachers, (ELA & Social Studies) and Grade 8 Math & Science Bilingual Teache r. Other professional developments are being planned and scheduled for the spring semester on the following topics: •“Using Cognates to develop Language and Comprehension” PD will be presented by Betzaida Franco, RBERN resource specialist in January, exact date to be scheduled. •Spanish Literacy Instruction will be presented by specialist at Fordham University on January. It will be attended by ESL teacher,they will in turn turn key information to the staff. This second session will focus on listening/speaking and writing in responding to text. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our school provides on-going parent workshops and meetings throughout the school year. The workshops are organized and presented by our ESL teachers, Parent Coordinator, PSO ELL Liasion and Guidance Department. The workshps are designed to address the academic, 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 87 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities linguistic and social development of adolescent ELLS. The workshops sessions are on going and held during the school day, after school and on Saturdays. The topics include but are not limited to: MS 219 Parent Orientation for ELLs; Overview of the Title III Program; GED and ESL Classes, How Can I Help My Child Prepare for the NYSESLAT? High School Information for Middle School Parents and Middle School Transition. Parents are notified via Phone Messenger, email and a paper copy. Based on surveys parents workshops are being conducted. Parents will be invited via school messenger and letters. Rosa will be translating all workshops through interpretation transmitters. There will be 8 workshops one every month for 3 hours. The parent coordinator will have sign in sheets along the agendas and maintain records in the Parent Center. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 88  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 09 School Name New Venture Academy Borough Bronx School Number 219 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dominic Cipollone Coach Celeste Smith ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Candida Mulero Teacher/Subject Area Maria Santos/Bilingual Teacher Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Luz Angulo Superintendent Leticia Rosario Assistant Principal Ivan DeJesus Coach Sharon Sullivan Kham School Counselor Natividad Cabrera Parent type here Parent Coordinator Reginald Mays Field Support Center Staff Member Dr. Olga Glenn Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program 3 Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 89  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 331 Total number of ELLs ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.00% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 10 11 12 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 Tot # 3 0 0 0 0 0 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At MS219X the following assessment tools are used: Fountas and Pinnell leveled books are used for running records and guided reading. Running records are conducted twice a year and guided reading once a week. Running records examine both accuracy and the types of errors students make. I-Ready assesses early literacy for our ELL population, specifically students’ reading and language arts through a combination of standards based and computer adaptive diagnostic testing. ELL Periodic Assessments data is used to determine progress. Based on the proficiency levels of the students we tailor our program for both ELA and ESL classes. The spring test helps measure the growth our students and informs teaching practices . We administered the fall baseline on October 28, 2015 and we are hoping to use the data used to create a more targeted curriculum to meet the needs of our ELL population. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 90  Running record data provide insights as to how ELLs are reading as individuals. Specifically, the types of errors made, the kinds of cues (i.e. meaning, visual or structural cues) each student continuously use or don’t use and the accuracy and correction rate; all of which affect comprehension. The data also helps teachers create their guided reading groups and select specific prompting during guided reading instruction. This helps to promote new learning. The goal is to help the ELLS develop a set of reading strategies that will lead them toward independent reading. The teacher will continue to expose ELLs to more readings on a variety of text, thus helping them gain a better understanding of correct oral language structures 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Reviewing and discussing the AMAO criteria helps our school understand how and why our ELLs are progressing or not. Clarity in the progress movement helps determine the next course of action action (i.e. planning, teaching practices, support) in order for growth to occur. On going professional development at grade and faculty conferences on ELL data analysis and ESL practices will continue. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] n/a 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. LAB-R performance indicates a specifically clear deficiency in the listening modality. This in turn affects the speaking, reading and writing modalities. The students are not meeting the benchmarks for each of the modalities. These deficiency patterns in the listening modality are also seen in the NYSESLAT results. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The ESL teacher collaboratively works with ELA teachers during common planning periods. The ESL teacher implements the ELA units and CodeX in the daily lessons. ELLs at the beginner and intermediate levels are receiving 8 periods in ESL instruction; students at the advanced level are receiving 4 periods in ESL and 6 periods of English Language Arts. ESL strategies are infused through instruction in the content areas, which include Science, Social 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 91  Studies and Math, and teachers reinforce the vocabulary development and literacy skills of ELLs by taking into account their proficiency levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. Students who have reached proficiency on the NYSESLAT are offered additional instructional time in extended day and Saturday academies for 2 years. Push-in and pull-out models are used for ESL instruction at MS 219X. These models will continue to be used. The ESL teacher collaboratively works with ELA teachers during common planning periods. The ESL teacher implements the ELA units and CodeX in the daily lessons. ELLs at the beginner and intermediate levels are receiving 8 periods in ESL instruction; students at the advanced level are receiving 4 periods in ESL and 6 periods of English Language Arts. ESL strategies are infused through instruction in the content areas, which include Science, Social Studies and Math, and teachers reinforce the vocabulary development and literacy skills of ELLs by taking into account their proficiency levels. English Language Learners are serviced by a Transitional Bilingual Education (TBE) and a Freestanding English as a Second Language (ESL) programs. The ESL teacher collaboratively works with ELA , Math, Sciecne, Social Studies and Music teachers during common planning periods. The ESL teacher implements the skill of the week in the daily lessons.Students arriving new to the country are placed in small groups for ESL instruction. They take part in extra tutoring sessions to develop the basic communication skills. The native language speakers are usually placed in a monolingual setting with a teacher who speaks Spanish. Native language speaking students with special needs are placed in the mandated setting according to their IEP. ELLs at the beginner and intermediate levels are receiving 8 periods in ESL instruction; students at the advanced level are receiving 4 periods in ESL and 6 periods of English Language Arts. ESL strategies for example- visuals- graphs, pictures, semantic webbing / mapping, t-charts and venn diagrams-are infused through instruction in the content areas, and teachers reinforce the vocabulary development and literacy skills of ELLs by taking into account their proficiency level. The number of ELLs in the 6th, 7th and 8th grade altogether is 104. Spanish is the language spoken by 61 ELLs. 2 Arabic, 7 French and 10 other languages are also spoken. Parents of ELLs are made aware of the services that are available for their children. Families that have recently arrived to the United States usually choose to place their children in the Transitional Bilingual Education program. Other parents have chosen to place their children in monolingual classes, and have opted for a Freestanding English as a Second Language program. Parents are also informed that their children will continue to receive the appropriate mandated services in either program. The students in both the Bilingual Transitional and the Freestanding English as a Second Language Program (ESL) program are serviced towards reaching proficiency in all modalities (speaking, reading, listening and writing) of the NYSELAT. The ELLS will be tested in the Examen de la Lectura en Espanol (ELE) and they receive interim assesments specifically for the ELLs. Study groups for ELLs will be created to ensure that these students have a clear understanding of the concepts that are being taught on a daily basis. Support groups for the newly arrived students will be formed in order to make a smooth transition into the school system, and these groups will focus on developing strategies that students can use to increase their academic achievement. In addition to the regular instructional programs used in different content areas (e.g. Code X for literacy, ELA units of study go Math, i-Ready), using the SIOP- Sheltered Instruction Oservation Protocol and Q-Tel strategies for instructional planning, students also participate in Saturday Academy. There is a wide range of materials and resources that are available in the classrooms, including a well equipped library that contains varied genres in different levels of readability, textbooks, workbooks, and computers/laptops to aid the students in the learning process -The development and ongoing refinement of a standards-based curriculum map which includes skill acquisition and application/practice of strategies for reading/writing texts during shared and guided reading/writing 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 92  -Review and analysis of the baseline assessment results, teacher made tests, projects, etc. -Consistent use of curriculum maps to guide instruction school-wide as evidenced by classroom visits, student work, lesson plans that include differentiated activities for grouping. -Classroom learning centers to facilitate differentiated learning -Classroom libraries with accessible leveled guided and independent reading materials, or classified by genre or authors -Spanish language content material in Math, Social Stuides and Science are also available when needed. Bilingual glossaries of content area terminology are given to each beginner and intermediate student for use in the monolingual classroom. Laptops are used regularly throughout the school year. Instruction for Native Language and English Literacy -Comprehension strategies need to be explicitly taught to students with interrupted formal education, such as: reader generated questions, summarizing and monitoring comprehension. Students practice with texts that are accessible at their level of language proficiency. If students don't experience successful application of comprehension strategies, they won't try to use them with other texts. -Strategies that make the language of the text meaningful and progress to higher levels of language proficiency and reading comprehension for students are: sharing ideas, comparing perspectives ,coming to agreement (or agreeing to disagree). -Techniques that Promote Exploration of Prior Knowledge During pre- and emergent literacy stages include: Free recall: Students are asked to tell everything they know about a chosen topic. This approach provides information within a short time interval but may be problematic for early stage (0-3 years) learners, who may have problems organizing their thoughts. Asking students to draw a picture can be most helpful. Word association: The teacher selects several key words and asks students what comes to mind when they hear each one. Structured questions: The teacher prepares specific questions and asks them. Responses can begin as yes or no and include more extended discourse. -Recognition: The teacher prepares several statements and key terms and encourages students to select those, which they recall. -Unstructured discussion: Students freely generate their own ideas about a word or topic. Teachers also scaffold using consistent, targeted guidance by modeling tasks and language, and by building background knowledge and offering ongoing feedback. The instructional plan can include but is not limited to:Teaching in the native language and English, Team teaching and other classroom support, small class size, tutoring , test accommodations, explicit instruction and balanced literacy models, grouping and cooperative learning strategies, block scheduling, looping Technology to promote multimodal/multi-sensorial learning. The instructional plan for ELLs with less than three years in US schools is to develop comprehension and basic interpersonal communication skills (BICS). Students in the pre-production and early production stages of language acquisition are engaged in experiences and activities that involve listening (known as the silent period for some ELLs) mime, acting, pointing, drawing, selecting, categorizing, responding etc. Beginning and intermediate ELLs meet for at least 360 minutes per week. The instructional plan for ELLs with 4-6 years is to further develop cognitive academic language proficiency (CALP) and speech emergence. Students engage in experiences and activities that include recalling, summarizing, role-playing, predicting, creating, analyzing, comparing, contrasing etc. Advanced ELLS meet for 180 minutes per week. The instructional plan for advanced ELLS is continued support in language development and comprehension. •Instructional strategies for ELLs with 0-3 years are: graphic organizers, games, Language Experience Approach, Total Physical Response, manipulatives and visuals, choral reading and the buddy system. •The instructional strategies for ELLs with 4-6 years are: Cooperative Learning, graphic organizers, manipulatives, visuals, journals, hands on projects, choral reading etc. • The school ensures that ELL-swds receive all services mandated on their IEPs via the articulation logs, bimonthly attendance and presentations at grade conferences. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 93  c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The instructional plan for ELLs with less than three years in US schools is to develop comprehension and basic interpersonal communication skills (BICS). Students in the pre-production and early production stages of language acquisition are engaged in experiences and activities that involve listening (known as the silent period for some ELLs) mime, acting, pointing, drawing, selecting, categorizing, responding etc. Beginning and intermediate ELLs meet for at least 360 minutes per week. The instructional plan for ELLs with 4-6 years is to further develop cognitive academic language proficiency (CALP) and speech emergence. Students engage in experiences and activities that include recalling, summarizing, role-playing, predicting, creating, analyzing, comparing, contrasing etc. Advanced ELLS meet for 180 minutes per week. The instructional plan for advanced ELLS is continued support in language development and comprehension. •Instructional strategies for ELLs with 0-3 years are: graphic organizers, games, Language Experience Approach, Total Physical Response, manipulatives and visuals, choral reading and the buddy system. •The instructional strategies for ELLs with 4-6 years are: Cooperative Learning, graphic organizers, manipulatives, visuals, journals, hands on projects, choral reading etc. • The school ensures that ELL-swds receive all services mandated on their IEPs via the articulation logs, bimonthly attendance and presentations at grade conferences. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. At MS 219X the teachers use instructional practices that make content more accessible and comprehensible for ELLs using SIOP practices inclusive of building background, relating the material to the students cultural understanding, using language accessible to the students and emphasizing key vocabulary through a variety of activities. Additionally the Science teacher (of the Bilingual class) provides multiple opportunities for discussion and comprehension development based on experiments conducted in class with readily available opportunities for students to analyze data, learn the scientific experiment method and build on their Native language skills. As we identify our needs for our varying levels of ELLs they are grouped together for ESL periods and AIS additional periods for targeted instruction. For example our SIFE and Newcomer students are encouraged to participate in all afterschool and Saturday Academies to provide ample opportunities which extend beyond the school day to be exposed to English through meaningful and engaging activities. The SIFE and Newcomers receive more hours of ESL services from our ESL provider who focus on test sophistication by constantly exposing those students to test-like passages and comprehension development. The students read passages, deconstructing the language and meaning from the text in order to make meaning and build familiarity with how to use reading strategies to answer test comprehension question. The 7 Keys to Comprehension are constantly are scaffolded into the lessons to ensure that: 1.a: ESL instruction is delivered through push-in/pull-out in accordance with students mandated minutes for ESL instruction aligned with language proficiency levels. 1b: All content-area classes are heterogeneously grouped and taught by highly qualified content-area teachers who have been trained in ESL and SIOP instructional strategies. ELL students are serviced by a licensed ESL teacher in a push in/pull-out program and are grouped according language proficiency levels. 2. In accordance with part 154, mandated instructional minutes are provided by a licensed ESL teacher. Our ESL teacher uses the NYSESLAT and modality reports to determine the number of minutes in instructional time that each child receives weekly. Beginner and intermediate students receive 360 minutes of ESL instruction weekly. Advance students receive 180 minutes of ESL instruction and 180 minutes of ELA instruction weekly. Additionally, native language is supported through books on tape, classroom libraries and students are encouraged to use their native language in discussion with their peers and in some 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 94  required writing assignments. 3. The ESL teacher and the mainstream teachers use ESL strategies to make sure that the ELL students understand the content that is explained to them . The ESL teacher is using the Key Stones Program, 3D, Mile Stones. 4. All the assessments in our school are completed in English . We also use the spanish lab to determine the language dominance. 5. In our school ELL students are taught in small groups. When the ESL teacher push –in she teaches the ELL students in a separate group. a.We have 13 SIFE students in our school. The ESL teacher use different strategies to evaluate their level of understanding in English. She works one to one with them.They are invited to stay after school to get extra support. SIFE students are also invited to attend Saturday academy. b.We have 66 students who have been receiving ESL instruction for less than three years. These students still have difficulties in English and the ESL teacher is working with them in groups of two to four students. Since these students will be taking the ELA exam, the ESL teacher is working together with the other ELA teachers to make sure they get the same content. Many teachers have been trained in SIOP model and we are using that model which is very helpful to ELL students. The ESL teacher is also using Keys Learning series from Pearson Education which is very helpful for newcomers. c. .We have 19 ELL students receiving service 4 to 6 years .These students need help in reading and writing. The ESL teacher is using more advanced reading books like Keystones, Milestones and 3D. d.We have 34 students who have been receiving service for more than 6 years. Most of these students have failed to reach the NYSESLAT modality benchmarks in reading and writing. With these students the ESL teacher and other teachers are working together to use scarfolding strategies . The are reading high leveled books. We also are working on better preparing them for the NYSESLAT. 6. For the students of ELL-SWDs we use instructional strategies sach as small guided groups, visuals,computers,teen beez,smart boards. The ESL teacher and other teachers work one to one with these students. 7. We have given the ESL teacher a flexible schedule, so that she is able to service all the ELL students and also give the instructional time required for ELL-SWDs. In addition, she works closely with other service providers. 8 The ESL teacher push – in and work together with the ELA , MATH and other content area teachers to make sure that the ELL students understand the content .The ESL teacher and other teachers plan together the lessons to make sure the needs of the ELL students are taken into consideration. 9.The former ELLS who have become proficient in English are supported with after school and Saturday Academy programs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELL Periodic asessments are administered during the school year. The school understands that the Periodic Assessments are good indicators of how well ELLs are progressing in English and how well they will perform on the NYSESLAT. Our ELLs continue to need many more experiences in the following genres: informational, literary as well as functional passages. They also need more familiarity with test formats: multiple-choice questions, short written responses, extended written responses, oral responses and a working knowledge on the use of rubrics in the development of their written responses. Through professional development and observation feedback teachers will continue to become more aware that their instructional delivery should mirror the students’ IEPs and/or learning modifications. It is how the students learn best. If an ELL with an IEP has extended time, use of glossary, questions read and reread, directions read, the teacher must model using these learning modifications during the instructional delivery. Teachers will continue to remind the ELLs that practicing these strategies will help him/her understand the topic. ELE results give a clear picture of ELLs’ vocabulary knowledge and understanding of words in context in Spanish. ELE Performance helps predict English reading performance. The reading skills are transferable from Spanish to English. The native language is also used to show similarities to the English language. ELLs are taught to recognize cognates and use them to create meaning. The ELE exam will be adminstered in the 2013- 2014 school year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 95  c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status At MS 219X the teachers use instructional practices that make content more accessible and comprehensible for ELLs using SIOP practices inclusive of building background, relating the material to the students cultural understanding, using language accessible to the students and emphasizing key vocabulary through a variety of activities. Additionally, the Science teacher (of the Bilingual class) provides multiple opportunities for discussion and comprehension development based on experiments conducted in class with readily available opportunities for students to analyze data, learn the scientific experiment method and build on their Native language skills. As we identify our needs for our varying levels of ELLs they are grouped together for ESL periods and AIS additional periods for targeted instruction. For example our SIFE and Newcomer students are encouraged to participate in all afterschool and Saturday Academies to provide ample opportunities which extend beyond the school day to be exposed to English through meaningful and engaging activities. The SIFE and Newcomers receive more hours of ESL services from our ESL provider who focus on test sophistication by constantly exposing those students to test-like passages and comprehension development. The students read passages, deconstructing the language and meaning from the text in order to make meaning and build familiarity with how to use reading strategies to answer test comprehension question. The 7 Keys to Comprehension are constantly are scaffolded into the lessons to ensure that the student are 1.a: ESL instruction is delivered through push-in/pull-out in accordance with students mandated minutes for ESL instruction aligned with language proficiency levels. 1b: All content-area classes are heterogeneously grouped and taught by highly qualified content-area teachers who have been trained in ESL and SIOP instructional strategies. ELL students are serviced by a licensed ESL teacher in a push in/pull-out program and are grouped according language proficiency levels. 2. In accordance with part 154, mandated instructional minutes are provided by a licensed ESL teacher. Our ESL teacher uses the NYSESLAT and modality reports to determine the number of minutes in instructional time that each child receives weekly. Beginner and intermediate students receive 360 minutes of ESL instruction weekly. Advance students receive 180 minutes of ESL instruction and 180 minutes of ELA instruction weekly. Additionally, native language is supported through books on tape, classroom libraries and students are encouraged to use their native language in discussion with their peers and in some required writing assignments. 3. The ESL teacher and the mainstream teachers use ESL strategies to make sure that the ELL students understand the content that is explained to them . The ESL teacher is using the Key Stones Program, 3D, Mile Stones. 4. All the assessments in our school are completed in English . We also use the spanish lab to do determine the language dominance. a.We have13 SIFE students in our school. The ESL teacher use different strategies to evaluate their level of understanding in English. The school works one to one with them.They are invited to stay after school to get extra support. SIFE students are also invited to attend Saturday academy. c. .We have 19 ELL students receiving service 4 to 6 years .These students need help in reading and writing. The ESL teacher is using more advanced reading books like Keystones, Milestones and 3D. d.We have 34 students who have been receiving service for more than 6 years. Most of these students have failed to meet the NYSESLAT modality benchmarks in reading and writing. With these students the ESL teacher and other teachers are working together to use scarfolding strategies . The are reading high level books.We also are working on better preparing them for the NYSESLAT. 6. For the ELLs who are SWDs, we use instructional strategies sach as small guided groups, visuals,computers,teen beez,smart boards. The ESL teacher and other teachers work one to one with these students. 7. We have given the ESL teacher a flexible schedule, so that she is able to service all of the ELL students and also give the instructional time required for ELL-SWDs. In addition, she works closely with other service providers. 8 The ESL teacher push – in and work together with the ELA , MATH and other content area teachers to make sure that the ELL students understand the content .The ESL teacher and other teachers plan together the lessons to make sure the needs of the ELL students are taken into consideration. 9.The former ELLS who have become proficient in English are supported with after schook and Saturday Academy programs. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 96  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? As part of making the learning more comprehensible for our students, all of our teachers have been trained in the following techniques: Use gestures and body language to help illustrate language. Speak clearly and pause often. Using repetition of key phrases and teaching students how to restate key ideas in their own words. Teachers are encouraged to write new vocabulary and key ideas on the board for those who especially need the audio-visual connection. The teachers frequently stop throughout their lessons to check comprehension and ensure learning throughout the lesson allowing students to ask questions and repair any breakdowns in meaning. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We have given the ESL teacher a flexible schedule so he is able to service all of the ELL students and also give the instructional time required for ELL-SWDs. In addition, she works closely with other service providers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. After school classes and tutoring in ESL, ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies are offered to support the transition of ELLs. Bilingual dictionaries and visuals are used in content area classes to support content comprehension and mastery. Intervention Services are provided for all of our English Language Learners. The Extended Day/ After-School Program for Beginners and Intermediate ESL students takes place between 3:00 P.M. to 4:30 P.M. Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. Here, these students receive additional support in the four modalities of reading, writing, listening, and speaking. We also offer a Saturday Enrichment Program in which the ESL teachers utilize a balanced literacy instructional approach. Students participate in 90 minute literacy blocks which contain a reading and writing workshop. These reading and writing workshops are comprised of independent reading, a mini-lesson, an active engagement, a work period and a closing. The Advanced ELL students work through author, genre, and thematic studies. The beginning and intermediate ELL students will focus on the skills of reading, writing, listening, and speaking through the use of thematic units of study. In addition, all ELL students are offered after school and Saturday programs in ELA, Math, and other content area subjects. All ELL students will also be offered a NYSESLAT preparation course after school in the spring semester. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year, a number of improvements are being considered for the ESL regular day and after school programs. For example, the ESL curriculum being developed this year has many content-area aspects, touching upon social studies, mathematics, and science. Achieve 3000 is a part of the ESL curriculum. We are focusing more on project-based learning this year, asking students to master vocabulary, grammar, content, and concepts through critical thinking and inquiry about leveled high-interest readings, using both prior and background knowledge. Students will produce various products using all four modalities of speaking, listening, reading, and writing. Students will compose essays,create PowerPoint presentations, and write on blogs. Students will also participate in activities that involve collaboration, such as the creation of posters, maps, and multimedia. In addition, we will continue to buy scholastic books to enrich our library. We will also purchase books in the students' native languages. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We don't plan to discontinue any of our programs for ELLs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. Intervention Services are provided for all of our English Language Learners. The Extended Day/After-School Program for Beginners and Intermediate ESL students takes place betweeen 3:00 P.M. to 4:30 P.M. Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. Here, these students receive additional support in the four modalities of reading, writing, listening, and speaking. We also offer a Saturday Enrichment Program in which the ESL teachers utilize a balanced literacy instructional approach. Students participate in 90 minute literacy blocks which contain a 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 97  reading and writing workshop. These reading and writing workshops are comprised of independent reading, a mini-lesson, an active engagement, a work period and a closing. The Advanced ELL students will work through author, genre, and thematic studies. The beginning and intermediate ELL students focus on the skills of reading, writing, listening, and speaking through the use of thematic units of study. In addition, all ELL students are offered after school and Saturday programs in ELA, Math, and other content area subjects. They also participate in all extra-curricular activities and are members of all school clubs. All ELL students will also be offered a NYSESLAT preparation course after school in the spring semester. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Every ELA, ESL and Social Studies classroom is equipped with a classroom-leveled library. Each classroom has a smartboard for teachers to help with visualization and reading, as well as laptops equipped with language acquisition and acceleration programs to be used in ESL classes. MS 219X recognizes that ELLs require specialized materials. The ESL teachers use books that are rich in content to promote language and conceptual development, and they are made accessible through the pictures or the print, so that students at all levels can benefit. The ESL teacher uses large visuals, graphic organizers, and other materials essential to making content comprehensible. The Keys to Learning and Milestones textbook series and A Cultural Reader has an interactive technological component and we also use Achieve 3000, to help students in their language development. We use supplemental materials from Pearson Education company 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our TBE, our ELLS receive instruction from certified teachers using Q-Tel, SIOP and ESL startegies. In our Free-standing ESL program, our ELLs receive native language support through the use of bilingual dictionaries and bilingual content-area glossaries. Our special needs ELLs also receive additional native language support through the inclusion of bilingual paraprofessionals in their classroom, if necessary. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our required services support and our resources correspond to our English language learners' varying ages, grade levels, and different levels of language proficiencies. Our ESL students are supported through required services in their content area subjests and content area instruction in the classroom by both the ESL teacher and classroom teacher. All ELLs are offered standard-based instruction according to their age and grade level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Every ELA, ESL and Social Studies classroom is equipped with a classroom-leveled library. Each classroom has a smartboard for teachers to help with visualization and reading, as well as laptops equipped with language acquisition and acceleration programs to be used in ESL classes. MS 219X recognizes that ELLs require specialized materials. The ESL teachers use books that are rich in content to promote language and conceptual development, and they are made accessible through the pictures or the print, so that students at all levels can benefit. The ESL teacher uses large visuals, graphic organizers, and other materials essential to making content comprehensible. The Keys to Learning and Milestones textbook series and A Cultural Reader has an interactive technological component and we also use Achieve 3000, to help students in their language development. We use supplemental materials from Pearson Education company 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). To assist our ELLs in their transition from elementary school to the middle school and from middle school to high school, MS 219X is considered to hold a Summer Orientation event in July in which newly enrolled students learn to acclimate themselves to the school community through team-building activities and a tour of the school. The Principal addresses ELLs during an assembly in which required testing, graduation requirements, and ELLs’ right to extended time during testing are emphasized. In addition, students are assessed, and, using the results of these assessments, students with the lower scores are enrolled in a three-week Extended Summer Program in which they receive intensive instruction in ELA/ESL and Math. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 98  None at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? One focus of the ELL PD Program is the development of speaking and listening skills for beginning English learners. All faculty including the SLT are trained on teaching the students to pronounce words clearly, follow oral directions and commands, and respond appropriately to oral questions. The students are taught to use target vocabulary and simple grammatical forms correctly while speaking on a variety of topics and in a variety of situations, such as spontaneous conversation, prepared dialogues, and impromptu and prepared speeches. Another focus of the ELL PD Program is the development of writing skills for beginning English learners. Teachers and all pedagogical staff receive training on teaching simple and compound sentence structure, usage, and mechanics, and the correct use of target vocabulary in context is emphasized. Composition pieces introduced to the students include a brief personal narrative and/or poem, short summary of factual information, personal letter, brief personal information card, simple application, and explanatory paragraph, among others. Another focus of the ELL PD Program is the development of oral and silent reading skills for beginning English learners. Teachers are trained in reciprocal reading strategies for both fiction and non-fiction. Extensive vocabulary, selected literary terms, and selected literary elements will be introduced. Students are taught to analyze both fiction and non-fiction for overall meaning and to use bilingual and English dictionaries and glossaries. Another focus of the ELL PD Program is the development of oral and silent reading skills for beginning English learners. Teachers are trained in reciprocal reading strategies for both fiction and non-fiction. Extensive vocabulary, selected literary terms, and selected literary elements will be introduced. Students are taught to analyze both fiction and non-fiction for overall meaning and to use bilingual and English dictionaries and glossaries. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Teachers receive training on providing ELLs advanced reading strategies aligned to the common core standards. The study of literature is introduced by reading short stories, poetry, novels and/or plays. Students are taught to analyze the short story and poetry for literary elements, figurative language, and overall meaning. Effective oral and written communication skills are also taught. Teachers are trained on ELL advanced writing that focuses on the development of English writing proficiency along with effective oral presentation skills and reading strategies. The composition pieces include the explanatory essay, summary, personal narrative, and personal letter. Students also learn to apply correct language conventions in their writing and locate resources in the library/media center. Teachers are trained in the use of the SIOP model which contains a language and content objective for every lesson. Teachers have been trained in using Q-Tel strategies in their lesons. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 99  Records are maintained by agenda, sign in sheets with minutes. Our new monolingual teachers are in the process of completing the state mandated requirement of 7.5 hours in ESL training. All of our teachers are kept informed of other professional development opportunities focusing on second language acquisition, and effective ESL strategies and methodologies. During the month of February the staff will be involved in in-house workshops and professional development that create a rigorous learning environment that focuses on academic achievement and language development. (RBERN) Newsletter which contains a wealth of ESL information is available to teachers. In addition, classroom teachers have the opportunity to attend ESL workshops at the school, , New York State Association of Bilingual Education (NYSABE) Teacher Institute, and Teaching English to Students of Other Languages (TESOL). Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At MS 219X, we realize the importance of a strong home and school partnership. We work diligently to ensure that parents are involved in our school. Parents are part of our Leadership Team. OurAssistant Principal, Parent Coordinator and Parent’s Association President collaborate to increase parent involvement. Parents participate in different activities organized by the school or the Parent Association such as meetings, parent-teacher conferences, workshops, school functions, homework assistance/tutoring, home educational enrichment, decision making, and other aspects of our school governance. etc. Some of them volunteer to chaperone on trips, field days, school dances, and other festivities. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Paste response to question here: Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 100 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Dominic Cipollone, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 101  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: MS 219 School DBN: 09x219 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dominic Cipollone Title Principal Ivan DeJesus Assistant Principal Reginald Mays Parent Coordinator Maria Santos ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Santa Rosario Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Celeste Smith Coach Coach Natividad Cabrera School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 11/15/15 11/15/15 11/15/15 11/15/15 1/1/01 11/15/15 1/1/01 11/15/15 1/1/01 11/15/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 102  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 09x219 School Name: MS 219 Superintendent: Mrs. Rosario The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Based on the Home Language Identification Survey, a record of adult preferred languages for written translation and oral interpretation are maintained in ATS: Spanish - 66%, Bengali - 1%, French - 15%; Fulani - 8.0%, Arabic - 2.0%, Haitian-Creole - 1,0%; Nepali - 2%; Other - 5%. Copies of said information are shared with our Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator, Community Coordinator, and others. All written correspondence between the school and students’ families is provided in the language of their choice, which most often is in their native language. As a result, we use the NYCDOE’s internal translation unit to provide translations of all school correspondence in Arabic, Bengali, French, Haitian-Creole, and Spanish including: a. Announcing important meeting dates (Open School Night, SLT meetings, Family Association meetings, etc.) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 103  b. Special events (Thanksgiving Feast, International Festival) c. Letters of concern about students’ academic performance and behavior d. Letters of congratulations praising student performance and behavior e. Welcome packets for families explaining school rules, mission, necessary supplies, permission slips, and FAQs about school policy, which they receive upon admitting their child to our school . 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Spanish Arabic French Haitian Creole 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? a. Announcements for important meeting dates (Open School Night, SLT meetings, Parent Association meetings, etc.) b. Special events (Thanksgiving Feast, student performances and parent teacher conferences) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 104 Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents.  c. Letters of concern about students’ academic performance and behavior d. Letters of congratulations praising student performance and behavior e. Welcome packets for families explaining school rules, mission, necessary supplies, permission slips, f. FAQs about school policy, which they receive upon admitting their child to our school 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We hold monthly PA meetings, as well as montly SLT meetings. We additionally hold regular Parent Workshops. Additionally, our Parent Coordinator makes daily outreach to families in regards to communication about school events, individual student issues, etc. Our guidance counselors regularly reach out to families in regards to individual students' academic progress towards graduation. Our Dean and Social worker additionally make calls to families and meet face-to-face. Teachers are expected to maintain regular communication with families regarding students' progress. Our Community Assistant and Attendance Teacher make daily phone calls in regards to absence. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 105  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Chancellor's Regulation A-663 is a directive on the responsibility that our school system is committed to for the opportunity of equal access to all rights, opportunity, information, and participation of LEP parents in our school. A parent will never be denied access to opportunities afforded their families, or to children enrolled at our school. As a result of these regulations, we have developed systems that will meet the needs of parents of ELLs who speak the predominant second language, Spanish,…………….. and less prevalent languages represented in our school, such as Arabic, Bengali, Fulani, Hausa, Mandinka, Seneca, and Twi………………. Additionally, Item B of Section VII in the Chancellor's Regulations relates to the conspicuous posting of DOE covered languages for translation. This appears upon entry to the school near the Security Desk. The school's safety plan provides that parents who need to communicate with the school, does so in their home language. This is determined via the Parents Preferred Language Form, which is available as part of the Family Resources through the Office of ELLs. All school based and consultant agencies will be utilized to this end, including community based organizations that will be instrumental in meeting the language needs of our parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Surveys will be given and feedback solicited during monthly PA meetings regarding the quality and availability of interpretation services and of key documents translated into home languages. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 106 
