 School Name: 09X339 I.S. 339 Principal: KIM OUTERBRIDGE 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information IS 339 320900010339 6-8 School Number (DBN): 09X339 1600 Webster Avenue, Bronx, NY 10457 (718) 583-6767 (718) 583-0281 Phone Number: Ms. Kim S. Outerbridge Fax: kouterb@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Bronx Works` Email Address: Ms. Kim S. Outerbridge Ms.Deborah Nunez Mr. QuintenBarnes Ms. Regina Robinson Mr. Jemel Martin SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Ms. Regina Robinson DawdaKonteh Grade 8 MaimounaHamadiouGrade 6 District Information Geographical District: 09 Ms. Leticia Rodriguez Rosario Superintendent: 1245 Washington Avenue, Bronx NY 10457 Superintendent’s Office Address: Lrosario2@school.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-579-7143 Phone Number: 718-410-8933 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Mr. Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 ZeregaAvenue, Bronx, New York 10462 jruiz@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. School Receivership In April 2015, state lawmakers and Governor Andrew Cuomo created section 211-f of the State Education Law, which established the School Receivership program as a new intervention strategy to turn around struggling schools. This new law, and Commissioner’s regulation 100.19, requires that “Persistently Struggling Schools,” defined as Priority Schools that have been in the most severe accountability status since the 2006-07 school year, be given an initial one or two-year period under a “Superintendent Receiver”. These schools were placed in receivership under the New York City Schools Chancellor. Each school must make demonstrable improvement on specific benchmarks or it will be placed under an independent receiver. Under the Chancellor’s Receivership Plan, the School Renewal Program is NYCDOE’s 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 5  core strategy for turning around struggling schools. Renewal Schools have already begun implementing significant interventions and are receiving additional resources and support to accelerate student performance and help close achievement gaps reflected in this RSCEP. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 6  The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 7  School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 8  Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) X X X X X X X X Ms. Kim S.Outerbridge or Ms. Celeste Ross-Barry *Principal or Designee Mr. QuintenBarnes Ms. Regina Robinson Mr. Jemel Martin Ms. Regina Robinson Ms. Deborah Nunez DawdaKonteh MaimounaHamadiou *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 10  Check if SLT X X X X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group Represented members required for high schools) Signature (Blue Ink) Mr. Gavin Adams Mr. Mike Vazquez Ms. Lillian Ortiz Ms. Marilyn Rivera Ms. Lynn Smith Ms. FransiscaRamirez Corporan Ms. Julie Sastre Teacher Teacher Teacher Parent Parent Parent Parent Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Community Engagement Team (CET) Signature Page Directions: Please fill out this form and indicate members of your Community Engagement Team. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each Community Engagement Team member in the first column. 2. Record the position and constituent group represented in the second column. 3. Community Engagement Team members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If a Community Engagement Team member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original signature page. Name Position and Constituent Group Ms. Kim S. Outerbridge Mrs. Celeste Ross-Barry 2018-19 RSCEP-PF Represented Principal Principal Designee Signature (Blue Ink) 11  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ms. Regina Robinson Ms. Deborah Nunez Ms. Lillian Ortiz Mr.JamelMartin Mr. Gavin Adams Mr. R. Echavarria Mr. Ivory Coleman Mr. Mike Vazquez Mr. QuintenBarnes xxxxx xxxxx xxxxx xxxxx PTAPresident CSD Teacher DC 37/SLTChairperson Teacher Parent Coordinator Assistant Principal Teacher UFTChapter Chairperson xxxxx xxxx xxxxx xxxxx 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 12  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. School Overview: Here at I.S. 339, we believe that all students should be exposed to and experience rigorous instruction that is aligned to the Common Core State Standards. We encourage students to actively participate in their own learning experiences. This includes maintaining daily attendance of 92%, as well as the expectation that all students come to school prepared and ready to learn. Additionally, parental involvement is crucial for student success. Parents are consistently contacted throughout the year, with an emphasis on meeting with parents during interdisciplinary team meetings when the parents are able to speak face to face with each member of team. ENGRADE and ongoing progress reporting to families in addition to official report card grades. Teachers are encouraged to update parents of their students academic, emotional, and social progression. Teachers are consistently improving their skills by participating in professional development opportunities and implementing new skills and practices in their classrooms. There are high expectations around the school's climate where students must feel safe in their learning environments each and every day. I.S 339 is a middle school in the Claremont neighborhood of the Bronx that serves grades 6 through 8. The student population is predominantly Hispanic (67 percent), with an additional 31 percent Black, and 1 percent Asian. According to the 2018-2019 state report card, 29 percent of the student population is limited English proficient and 26 percent are students with disabilities. Ninety-five percent of the student body is considered to be economically disadvantaged. We have identified our academic goal to increase the number of level 3 and 4 students in English Language Arts (ELA) and mathematics by 10 percent. In 2018, on the school quality review, we received an ratings of proficient for all of the indicators with 1 indicator being rated as well developed (3.4) . Creating learning experiences that align directly to the Common core Learning Standards (CCLS) with clear evidences to support the instructional shifts, students will be exposed to rigorous instructional tasks that promote critical thinking skills and the use of academic language. Our principal leads by example, taking the role of instructional leader by meeting with the ELA and mathematics teacher leaders, and distributing weekly updates in these subject areas. Additionally, our principal has also sought to keep class sizes small by maintaining manageable numbers of students in each homeroom class. In this way, there is a maximized number of classroom teachers and the ratio of student to teacher is smaller than most neighboring community schools. Our mission continues as we will cultivate and develop the entire school community so that all students become college-and-or career ready. With foci on all populations of children, teachers engage collaboratively to ensure accelerated student learning. This is done because our teachers are reflective practitioners and professionals who are constantly developing and expanding their craft. A guiding philosophy and principle for all of the adults in the school community is that every student deserves an effective teacher, and we work tirelessly to seek out opportunities that will advance this belief. In order to accomplish our school’s missions, we, as a school community, have established a variety of systems, initiatives, and practices. Some of these include: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 13  Academic/Curriculum: ● English Language Arts: Expeditionary Learning, Teacher’s College Writing Workshops , I-Ready and MY-ON ● Math: Engage New York Modules and the Five Practices ● Social Studies: Passport, New York City Social Studies Scope and Sequence, Core Curriculum, History Alive, Flocabulary ● Science: Smart Science, New York State Coach, FOSS ● Art: Art Curriculum ● Health: Common Core Aligned Health Curriculum ● Physical Education: Fitness Gram Assessment ● Native Language: Common Core Aligned Curriculum in Native language ● Spanish: Introductory level class for non-Spanish speakers ● English as a Second Language: Rosetta Stone, Scholastic’s System 44, Milestones, Imagine Learning ● Small class size ● Cross Curricular Team Meetings-Interdisciplinary ● Grade Content Meetings ● Collaboration with Columbia’s Teacher’s College: Writer’s Workshop ● Collaborative Inquiry Teams-Data Wise and Meeting Wise ● Learning Walks and Instructional Rounds to reflect upon and improve school practices and increase rigor ● Multiple Entry Points included within all lessons ● Curriculum Aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards ● Socratic Seminars ● Learning Celebrations ● Administering of surveys to teachers to assess needs ● Saturday and Recess Academy ● Specialized High School Examination Classes ● Performing Art High School Preparations 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 14  ● Partnership with Pace University, Bronx Works and SCAN Social/Emotional: ● Respect for All Team ~ Emotional Intelligence - The RULER PROJECT@Yale University ~ Restorative Justice - NYCDOE ● Father’s Forum ● Honor Roll and Perfect Attendance incentive assemblies ● Honor Roll and Perfect Attendance field trips ● Attendance team which outreaches to students with attendance issues ● Embracing Multiculturalism and Culturally Responsive Education ● Harvest Feast with students and community ● Family Day ● Spirit Days ● Talent Show ● Guidance Counselors attending a series of six workshops ● Partnership with Astor ● Partnership with CBO (Bronx Works, SCAN) Parental Involvement: ● Harvest Feast with students and communities ● Monthly Celebrations in order to collaborate with parents and communities ● Family Day ● Father’s Forum ● Monthly Workshops for Parents ● Saturday Academy for Parents ● Adult Education and ESL Program for Parents 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 15  ● Partnership with CBO - Social Emotional Supports School Belief about Student Learning: Here at I.S 339, we believe that all students should be exposed to and experience rigorous instruction that is aligned to the Common Core State Standards. We encourage students to actively participate in their own learning experiences. This includes maintaining a daily attendance, as well as coming to school prepared and ready to learn. Additionally, parental involvement is crucial for student success. Parents are contacted throughout the year, with an emphasis Tuesday contacts. Teachers are encouraged to update parents of their student’s academic, emotional, and social progression. Teachers are consistently improving their skills by participating in professional development opportunities and implementing new skills and practices in their classrooms. There are high expectation for school climate in which students feel safe in their learning environments. School Population Needs: Our school community puts an emphasis on our student’s with disabilities, as well as the population of students who are English Language Learners. We ensure their learning and academic needs by making sure all students receive Common Core Aligned curriculum, as well as lessons with multiple entry points. CBO Partnership: Currently we are partnered with two CBOs, Bronx Works, and SCAN. Both organizations will assist our school with the expansion of the school's mission and vision by facilitating small group instruction and clubs for students after school Tuesday through Friday (4-6pm) and on Saturdays (9am-3pm). These additional learning experiences will support the school's established vision and mission as well as help the school deepening the relationships between families, parents, students and our school. Expanded Learning Time: Newly created Town Hall experiences involve the entire school body every 6 to 8 weeks on Tuesdays. Students receive curriculum aligned presentations as well as social-emotional supports. In this forum, students interact with the presenters and each other as the school further expands the student's understanding of their responsibilities as scholars. Consistent reference to High School, College, and Career references propel each session ( 2:40 - 3:55 pm). Three themes are messaged to students during the course of this school year. Surviving Middle School, College and Career Readiness, and School Spirit will be the focus for the 2018-2019 Town Hall meetings to be held every 6th week. All other Tuesdays through Fridays will include specified English language arts and Mathematics instruction. Using Triumph Learning - Mastering the Standards in Reading and Finish Line in Mathematics, teachers model close reading strategies, think alouds, and strategies to unpack multiple step mathematics problems to ensure our students master strong test sophistication strategies. School strengths, accomplishments, and challenges: Reflecting upon our school’s 17-18 RSCEP administrative teams, school leaders utilized SLT and cabinet meetings to improve communication throughout the school. The principal has implemented a variety of structures in order to cultivate a highly supportive and inclusive culture that positively and significantly impacts the academic and personal development of its staff and students. Evidence of these impacts are reflected in our School’s Quality Review. The school strategically use resources, which align to the school’s goals, resulting in meaningful student work products. Across classrooms, teachers align assessments to curricula and the “Danielson’s Framework for Teaching” in order to make effective instructional adjustments that support student achievement. School leaders support teacher development through frequent cycles of classroom observation that promote reflection and growth based on this 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 16  framework. Our professional development opportunities support teachers so that they can effectively meet their goals and become reflective practitioners when assessing student learning and best practices. ● Effectively communicate a clear vision for improving students’ achievement. Developed an Extended/Instructional Cabinet which is comprised of the schools administration as well as teacher leaders that conduct collaborative inquiry. This practice supports all staff in the delivery of a high quality curriculum with essential support for all subgroups within the school during the school day and also during expanded learning time. ● Provide opportunities to all learners, with a specific focus for ELL’s and students with disabilities in order to meet CCLS and student’s needs through differentiation. The barriers and challenges encountered while implementing our school’s 17-18 RSCEP were seen when promoting and expanding and maintaining consistent practices amongst our school and community. Also, providing financial resources for instructional programs and extracurricular programs continue to be a challenge. ● A strong and consistent leadership team, with a cabinet and extended cabinet/instructional team that meets regularly to review, clarify and refine the school's improvement plan based on the school’s needs continues. Using DATA WISE -MEETING WISE protocols supports this process.  Establishing a consistent hiring committee to ensure a collaborative effort is taken to identify highly qualified teachers continues to be an proposed effort on the part of the school. As a Renewal School, we will continue to expand implementation of the following school improvement strategies during this school year: ● Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during after- school and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners ● Continued implementation of the community school model in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports that will be made available in or near the school community. ● Continued professional development and modeling for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students ● Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement by providing parents with multiple opportunities to network with one another and so that we will continue to engage in purposeful events. ● A comprehensive needs assessment across all six elements of the Capacity Framework (rigorous instruction, collaborative teachers, supportive environment, effective school leadership, strong family-community ties, and trust) in September 2018 in order to inform the ongoing development and adjustments to our School Renewal Plans for the 2018-19 school year. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 17  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X339 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 516 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 76 76 9 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 33 29 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 89.3% % Reduced Lunch 29.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 68.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.09 2% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 23.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 51 51 91.5% 0.6% 26.9% 29.3% 1.7% 0.4% 4 35% 3.8 18.0% 54% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A YSH NO YES N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 18  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The schools Developing rating is based on the SED Integrated Intervention Team, December 2013, which points to a more effective use of data to develop and implement the CCLS and an interdisciplinary curriculum. Using Data Wise as the model for Inquiry, the school has adopted this process to effectively implement the cycle of inquiry. Teachers work collaboratively in the instructional team/extended cabinet to ensure collaborative inquiry occurs across the content areas during the instructional day and during Expanded learning time during the additional mandated hour. Ensuring that all students receive coherent and rigorous instruction that is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards, we will continue to implement a professional development calendar which is designed based on hard and soft data sources. This model ensures that we continue to build capacity in the area rigorous instruction. Moving forward, teacher leaders will continue to plan and lead professional learning experiences for their peers. In conjunction with the needs assessment survey to be administered in September 2018, a detailed professional learning plan is constructed to support all of the adult learners in our school. In addition, we have a system in place which allows educators to meet every other day to plan curriculum, reflect on data, create tiered tasks and address student needs. The Principal and Assistant Principals offer support to these meetings in order to ensure the school-wide expectations are followed through and the next steps are facilitated. Here, at IS339, we use a structure of systems, baselines, and Measure of Student Learning (MOSL) assessments in order to drive instruction and create multiple entry points. Furthermore, we have collaborative inquiry teams which focus on student and teacher collaborations. We currently 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 20  have set curriculum in our English Language Arts and Mathematics classrooms which are aligned to the common core. With special emphasis and focus on English language learners and students with disabilities, the school wide team will meet the needs of all students by addressing the multiple entry levels as revealed by ongoing data. New and improved classroom libraries, in the English language arts classrooms will provide multiple entry points for lower level readers. High interest-low readability text will be purchased again this school year so that all students are met at their instructional and independent reading levels. In November 2015, the school introduced a new assessment platform to all teachers. We continue to use Mastery Connect to promote common assessments and the analysis of student results. This ensures that all teachers track student progress and learning over time. Although we have many of these systems established, we are still making strides to improve our systems by ensuring they are implemented in all subject areas, school wide, by all educators. The Instructional Team/Extended Cabinet engages in collaborative inquiry using the Data Wise/Meeting Wise protocols as a school wide study to ensure students receive targeted instruction in the areas of English language arts and Mathematics during the additional hour required for all Renewal Schools. Moving forward, we are improving our plan to include arts and technology related assignments within all curriculum areas. Based on the summative data acquired from the 2017 New York State English language arts and mathematics examination, the following trends were identified: In the area of English language arts, students showed an increase of .9% . In the area of Mathematics, students increased by 2.8%. However, preliminary data, specifically the 2017-2018 June Instructional Report suggest the following: In Grade 6 through 8 in English language arts and in Mathematics there is demonstrable improvement. Year to year, the overall data shows a 12.8 increase in the area of ELA and a 9.1 increase in the area of mathematics. For the 2017-2018 school year English language learners showed 1.7% of the students to be at level 3 or 4. Additionally, students with disabilities revealed a 5.8% increase in level 3 and 4 students from the prior year. In Mathematics, students with disabilities have 3.7% of the population meeting the standards. While the English language learners showed a 2.3% increase of Level 1's in ELA and 10.3% in Math. SWDs showed an increase of 4.9% level ones and 6.2% decrease level ones in Math. During the 2018-2019 school year we anticipate an increase in the overall student outcomes particularly regarding the English language learners and students with disabilities with particular focus on the decrease of level 1's. The school wide priority focus regarding teachers' and students' demonstrable use of academic language across content areas with language acquisition strategies as our priority statement, this will directly impact results for our special populations as well as the entire student body. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 21  Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? 1. Teachers have access to Common Core State standards (CCSS)- aligned curriculum in all subjects and work together to plan lessons and develop instructional strategies. The administration will continue to take an active role to assure that units of study and daily lesson plans are aligned to CCSS. The following program are used: English Language Arts - Reading - Expeditionary Learning, Writing - Teacher's College Writing Units of study, Social Studies - NYC Core Curriculum aligned to the NYC/NYS scope and sequence for Grades 6 through 8, Science - NYC Core Curriculum, Coach and Glencoe Textbooks, Foss hands-on science kits. 2. All lessons provide tiered task activities to address the needs of our students. These tiered tasks will be determined by student data. Teachers collaborate during teacher team meetings on determining ways to take the curriculum and tailor it to each tier. Formative and summative assessments will be relied upon to inform instruction, and tiered groupings will be done to support instruction. T 3. The school promotes high expectation for rigorous instruction. During the 2017-2018 School Quality Review, the school received a WELL-DEVELOPED FOR INDICATOR 3.4. Expanded Learning Time provides all students with multiple opportunities to further develop academic skills that may be deficient. Students have opportunities to use acquired knowledge in all content areas, such as cross curriculum tasks, study habit skills and or develop self esteem. Bronx WORKS, the CBO, will further expand our vision by facilitating small groups where students will engage in extra-curricula activities 5 days a week and on Saturdays. These clubs will include but not limited to dance, karate, drama, sports, and art. 4. Here at IS 339 we follow with fidelity the workshop model where teachers provide mini-lesson, with explicit modeling during the I-Do, We-Do, You Do 1 (an additional step implemented at the school level) and the You Do 2. Students are given the opportunity to practice the learned task independent of the teacher in pairs, triad or small groups (YOU Do2). Teachers then conference with students during independent practice to further give students guidance or elicit from them lack of understanding or further re-teach. Students will have an opportunity to assess themselves using a plethora of options. For example, self and or peer assessment checklists, and or exit slips. 5. In all subject content areas students will be challenged with tiered task as multiple entry point activities ensure the success of every child. Students receive tasks that are tailored to meet their needs based on flexible groups. Teachers participate in professional development that support planning next steps and all instructional decisions . With support from the NYC Department of Education and the District Nine team, 339 teachers will expand pedagogical practices across content and across grades. 6. All teachers will use the content team meetings for common planning time, sharing instructional strategies, review past content and plan for future lessons. They work collaboratively, discuss opportunities to integrate the workshop model into the curriculum, develop tiered lesson and common assessments. 7. All content area teams will create baseline, unit, and benchmark assessments. In ELA and Math diagnostic assessments will be used to identify areas of strength and weakness. We use Google docs to collect and store student data to identify growth, strength, weakness and next step. iReady as well as Rally are used to English language arts and Mathematics. Teacher teams create exams for social studies and science using previously administered New York State standardized examinations. In addition, social studies teachers use History Alive to promote the understanding of primary resources as a means to pose document based questions. Baseline exam results reveal student needs and provide teachers with the opportunity to plan clear instructional next steps within all of the content areas. This action will impact the quality of the instructional program and provide students with high quality tasks. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 22  What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? Teachers have access to Common Core State standards (CCSS)- aligned curriculum in all subjects and work together to plan lessons and develop instructional strategies. During The administration will continue to take an active role to assure that units of study and daily lesson plans are aligned to CCLS. The following program are used: English Language Arts - Reading - Expeditionary Learning, Writing - Teacher's College Writing Units of study, Mathematics -Engage NY - with teaching strategies that are aligned to the Practices for Mathematics, Social Studies - Passport, History Alive, NYC Core Curriculum aligned to the NYC/NYS scope and sequence for Grades 6 through 8, Science - NYC Core Curriculum, Coach and Glencoe Textbooks, Foss hands-on science kits. What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? All content area teams will create baseline, unit, and benchmark assessments. In ELA and Math diagnostic assessments will be used to identify areas of strength and weakness. We use Google docs to collect and store student data to identify growth, strength, weakness and next step. iReady as well as Rally are used to English language arts and Mathematics. Teacher teams create exams for social studies and science using previously administered New York State standardized examinations. In addition, social studies teachers use History Alive to promote the understanding of primary resources as a means to pose document based questions. Baseline exam results reveal student needs and provide teachers with the opportunity to plan clear instructional next steps within all of the content areas. This action will impact the quality of the instructional program and provide students with high quality tasks. Students will use RALLY test preparation materials to support mastery of the common core learning standards as presented on the NYS ELA and Math examinations in April and May 2019. In addition, 8th Grade students will be supported by implemeting standards based science test pre0paration materials aligned tot he objective co0mponent of the ILSPET examination. Students will practice and prepare for the ILSPET examination so that the school can meet annual yearly progress in this area. What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? In all of the content areas, students will receive tiered tasks during the independent learning component of the workshop. Using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child, emphasis on English language learners and special education students must guide our work. In all content areas the workshop model will be used. In addition, the 5-practices for Mathematics is aligned and embedded within the workshop model to ensure student discussion occurs during the Mathematics block. Students will receive tasks that are tailored to meet their needs based on flexible groups. Teachers receive professional development to support their instructional decisions. Through the NYC Department of Education and the District Nine team, 339 teachers will expand teacher practices in this particular area with ongoing support from the Central and District staff. How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? All lessons provide tiered task activities to address the needs of our students. These tiered tasks will be determined by student data. Teachers collaborate during teacher team meetings every other day in order to determine ways to construct rigorous tasks and tailor each task to match each group of students. Formative and summative assessments will be relied upon to inform instruction, and tiered groupings will be done to support instruction. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? All content area teams administer baseline/diagnostic, module/unit, and benchmark/mid line/endline assessments. In ELA and Math diagnostic assessments will be used to identify the students areas of strength and weakness. We use Google docs to collect and store student data to identify growth, strength, weakness and next step. iReady as well as Rally are used to English language arts and Mathematics. Teacher teams create exams for social studies and science 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 23  using previously administered New York State standardized examinations. In addition, social studies teachers use History Alive to promote the understanding of primary resources as a means to pose document based questions. Again, baseline exam results reveal student needs and provide teachers with the opportunity to plan clear instructional next steps within all of the content areas. This action will impact the quality of the instructional program and provide students with high quality tasks every day for every subject. Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) SRI Diagnostic/Screener 6 through 8 iReady - ELA/Math District Assessment Rally - ELA/Math End line READY Baseline and Midline 6 through 8 6 through 8 6 through 8 To identify the independent reading level of all students Renewal school data Formative Data Baseline and Midline Renewal school data Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, teachers will engage students with consistent opportunities to deepen their understanding using Common Core units of study that rigorous tasks. Explicit and intentional differentiation with evidenced multiple entry points will show in order to promote consistent use and the understanding of academic language and critical thinking skills at all levels. This will be measured by classroom observations(ADVANCE), teacher/team evaluations-reflections and student work products that show a measurable increase (by 10%) 100 to 110 students for ELA and 81 to 89 students in mathematics for all LEVEL 3 AND 4 students. The overall reduction of level 1 students by 10% in 187 to 169 students in ELA and 254 to 229 in mathematics. (1.1, 1.2,5.1) Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Student Attendance Collaborative Teachers Rigorous Instruction 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 24  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers Collaborative Teachers Weekly, Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal and assistants principals District supervisory staff Rigorous Instruction BFSC coaches Teaching Matters Coaches How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Teacher evaluation forms 1. Principal and assistant principals, UFT teacher center coach, model teachers, district level staff, and other teacher leaders will facilitate professional development activities on interpreting the data and utilizing the information to curriculum development with strong emphasis on the Common Core Learning Standards aligned to the New York State Performance indicators will guide and shape " what will be taught" in grades 6-8. Internal and external professional development will be at school site. Google forms will be used to evaluate the quality of each professional learning experience. Teachers will be asked to submit their anonymous feedback to ensure honest responses. 1. All teachers meet with other content area teachers every other day. In this way, teachers build capacity and write Teachers Collaborative teachers Weekly, Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, assistant principal, content facilitators and teachers Google minutes 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 25  curriculum maps displaying "depth verse breath" within each unit. Data Wise and Meeting Wise protocols determine how Collaborative Inquiry teams use the analysis of students work to gather information about students learning and problems of practice in order to make revisions and specific next steps/instructional decisions relative to the academic goals. This includes high leveled skills and strategies to be taught based on researched based best practices. Minutes are documented and warehoused using a Rolling Agenda format on Google Docs. All teacher meetings are memorialized using this system to ensure evidence and focus for all of the ongoing meetings. 1. Parents workshops that are ongoing to support family engagement and inform parents and families of the CCLS, school wide expectations, and community related concerns. 1. Within our school community, we have worked to include various activities which promote the growth of the relationships between this school and Parents Rigorous Instruction Monthly, August 2018 Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Weekly, Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Student,Teacher, other staff and Parents Student Attendance Collaborative Teachers Principal, assistant principal, and parent coordinator Parent Attendance CSD BronxWorks Principal, assistant principals teachers and Parent coordinator Attendance data over time Google Minutes 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 26  our community. Some of these activities include: Inter-visitation, Learning Walks, Curriculum Nights, Parent workshops, Saturday and Holiday Academies, Talent Show, Family Day, Father’s Forum, Celebratory Curriculum Events 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Ongoing parent empowerment events and workshops facilitated by the parent coordinator with specific emphasis on rigorous instruction and the NEW YORK STATE standards will support parent awareness and understanding. In addition, participants will develop strong partnerships with the school as opportunities for successful learning experiences occur yearlong. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. 1. Professional development for teachers (two sessions per week) 2. Scheduled meetings during the school day for share best practices - specifically, collaborative inquiry team work with focus on the lowest third, students with disabilities and English language learner's. 3. Scheduled meetings during the school day for share best practices and analyze data - IPC meetings, professional goal setting, mid year teacher goal revisit, end of the year teacher conversations in regards to year long data confirmed accomplishments. 4. Time for professional development during school and after school time Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 27  1. By February 2019, the following items will be measured as per each indicator below: ~ A least 2 cycles of collaborative inquiry will be completed. This includes data analysis for each grade, classes and student groups for each interim and end of unit exam where applicable. Teacher teams complete an assessment analysis document for each test administered. By grade, total group and individual classes, teachers identify trends and patterns within assessment results as a team and then as individual pedagogues to ensure differentiation for their classes. Consistent use of Mastery Connect by all teachers as a means to monitor progress and track student learning over time. ~ At least (2) completed scope and sequence documents that include rigorous tasks in English language arts, Mathematics, Social Studies and Science which aligned with the CCLS. This ongoing Scope and Sequence design occurs by grade content teams prior to each unit's beginning. Content supervisors facilitate and monitor the progress and completion of all plans and tasks. Review of ADVANCE data will support teacher growth and the evidence of rigorous instruction being implemented daily. ~ Evidence of meeting minutes reflective of the every other day planning meetings reviewed bi-weekly by the content supervisor. Comments are added to the electronic document housed in GOOGLE DOCS. ~ Weekly electronic professional development evaluation surveys to show the effectiveness of the professional development offerings. Monthly review of this data by the PD committee. Housed in GOGGLE DOCS. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. This as measured by hard copy and electronic tracking systems for grade, class, and individual student progress in the areas of English language arts and Mathematics. At this time there is only preliminary data. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The schools D rating is based on the SED Integrated Intervention Team, December 2013, addressing the need for a comprehensive and integrated system in meeting the social, emotional and academic needs of all students. Currently, we have a system in place in which we are able to meet weekly to contact parents and address concerns and positive aspects our student’s educational experience. Additionally, we have an in-house clinic, ASTOR, which works to promote mental health amongst our student population. An internal Respect for All (RFA) Team continues to coordinate and organize assemblies to promote positive interactions amongst students with an emphasis on self-respect, confidence, and how to appropriately deal with bullying situations. Tracking student social-emotional behaviors and the school's response to these behaviors is warehoused in Google Docs. Using an online section sheet, the electronic parent log, ENGRADE, and a newly merged document to show student interventions and their improvement over time (New Visions Data Portal), the school will meet the needs of our students. In order to establish and maintain a comprehensive and integrated system for the evidence of social-emotional and academic achievements and changes over time, we will practice using these protocols daily. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 29  What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? During the 2018-2019 school year - all student and teacher furniture will be upgraded in order to provide our scholars with the appropriate and necessary tools for learning. Classroom environments that are warm, inviting and aligned to the 21st Century vision for teaching and learning. Classroom environments will show and demonstrate the school's position regarding our students' needs. With the allocations provided by the Community School Grant, all classroom environments will provide staff and students with innovative study and work spaces. Any additional funding for classroom environment upgrades will rely on the current 2018-2019 school budget. As listed below, the following steps and processes will be implemented as we move towards our overarching goals. 1. I.S 339 will provide opportunities for all stakeholders to engage in a safe and productive learning environment. This will be done through rigorous instruction with Common Core aligned curriculum and a promotion of collaboration amongst our community of stakeholders. 2. Currently we are in a new partnership with the CBO, BRONXWORKS. BRONXWORKS SUPPORTS our school with multiple foci. They provide children, youth, and families in low-income neighborhoods the opportunities they need to thrive through comprehensive education and career programs, and access to community services. IS339, along with BRONX Works, will be moving forward in order to create an environment that fosters and promotes healthy social and emotional progression for all students. Collaboratively, we will work together as a cohesive team to ensure students are on track to pursue a future filled with personal and professional success. 3. Student’s voice and leadership are supported through the Student Council/Government. All grades are included and represented in the Student Council. Students participate in activities in and around the community during the school year. ie: The Breast Cancer Awareness Walk (October 2015.16.17.18). Students sponsor dances for the entire campus. Student Council members (for the first time) will be represented on the School Leadership Team (SLT). Students also lead the morning announcements daily. 4. Our school’s Respect For All Team promotes positive behaviors through a reward systems and incentives. Town Hall meetings will expand our initiative. Every 6-weeks, "Town Hall meetings" allow students to voice their opinions and thinking relative to the topics presented. 5. Our school promotes the social and emotional needs by setting high expectations for the school community. Teachers and counselors work closely in order to ensure the social and emotional health of the entire school population. The counselors work closely with the staff and students in order to maintain open communication between the students’ families and their school. THE RULER Approach @Yale University (MOOD METER), Restorative justice, our Student Government and 9 by 9 Overage Initiatives will assist the school in maintaining and expanding the environment so that there is consistent evidence to show student improvement. 6. Our school measures social and emotional development by using the MOOD METERS, monitoring daily attendance, which impacts the reduction of the incidents reported on the online incident reported system 7. In order to improve our attendance and minimize our chronic absenteeism, will we be focusing on parental outreach. IS339, along with our CBOs, SCAN and Bronx Works, create an action plan for the 9% of our students who are chronically absent. Along with the already established attendance team, the school will continue to improve within this area. 8. The culture of the school will be one where students push and motivate other students as study skills are taught effectively and support academic confidence in all of our students. Observing a measurable increase of students “doing the work/completing all assignments”, “paying attention in class” and “being a successful student” will be the norm, NYCDOE, Overview of the Framework for Greet Schools, since January 2015. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 30 CBO Partner Bronx Works Parent empowerment, academic interventions, and emotional intelligence/restorative justice supports CBO Focus Bronx Works Overall support following the Community School Model How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? The CBO will work closely with the school's teams in order to maintain attendance at 92%, improve student academic and emotional outcomes, and increase parental engagement. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. Based on OORS and Attendance data, by June 2019, our students will be engaged in ongoing instructional tasks and learning activities that address the Culturally Responsive Education (CRE) initiatives (NYCDOE), Emotional Intelligence (using the RULER project @Yale) and De-Escalation practices. Effective practice will result in the direct impact of school level infractions. We expect a 10% decrease in the overall students’ incidence rate. This will also impact student's attendance so that we meet our goal of (92%). This will also yield an overall decrease by 10% (20 OORS reports) in student behavioral infractions s reported in the OORS system. Our benchmark was met as per the 2017-2018 year to date target. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Implement Community School Emotional Intelligence Structures Restorative Justice Practices 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 31  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. 1. Utilizing data and desegregating data to monitor all systems that support student social and emotional health. District Public will present academic and social emotional data to staff 1. Organizing and analyzing all sources of data to in order to create goals and actions plans to address students’ needs. Restorative justice protocols will begin in September 2017 with the support of the NYCDOE. 1. Effective use of the Respect For ALL Team to facilitate assemblies and parents workshops, bi-monthly Town Hall Meetings. 1. Effective use of the Respect For ALL Team to facilitate assemblies, classroom visits, field trips, Holiday Feast, Father Forum, Mother's Forum, Family Day, and Learning Walks Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teacher, Guidance counselors Implement Community School Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, network supervisory staff, CBO staff members, guidance counselor, dean, parent coordinator, teachers, and school aides How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) 10% Decrease in incident reports as per the OORS system Teachers and Guidance counselors, deans Implement Community School Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, District supervisory staff, CBO supervisory staff, guidance counselor, dean, parent coordinator, teachers, and school aides 10% Decrease in incident reports as per the OORS system Students and Parents Implement Community School All stakeholders Implement Community School Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, CBO supervisory staff, guidance counselor, dean, parent coordinator, teachers, and school aides Principal, assistant principals, CBO supervisory staff, guidance counselor, dean, parent coordinator, teachers, and school aides 10% decrease in incident reports as per the OORS system 10% Decrease in incident reports as per the OORS system 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 32  4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Ongoing parent empowerment events and other learning experiences that will target specified topics related to effective parenting and academics which will be facilitated by the parent coordinator regularly during the 2018-2019 school year. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Principal, assistant principals, network supervisory staff, guidance counselor, parent coordinator, teachers, and school aides. 2. Scheduled team meetings of school administrators and all school stakeholders 3. Scheduled team meetings of school administrators, guidance counselor , teachers, network supervisory staff, and Respect for ALL Team 4. SLT meetings Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, the following benchmarks will be met and measured by: 1. Evidence of improvement by way of the following reports (New Vision Data portal, ATS, City Wide and Internal Surveys, Parent Outreach Logs and Guidance Counselor feedback. Merged document to show student improvement. 2. Meeting minutes that show interventions and action plans for students receiving additional support . One supervisor also facilitates along with the School Based Support Team members. 3. (2 to 4) school wide assemblies calendared for school year with a reflection or survey from students mid-year (2/19) and at the end of the school year (6/19). 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 33  4. Bi- Weekly meeting minutes / log of Respect for All committee that addresses academic, attendance, social and emotional foci for Town Hall Meetings. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. This will be measured by ongoing documented teacher and staff feedback housed in GOOGLE Docs and Mastery Connect. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed X X X X 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The schools Developing rating is based on the SED Integrated Intervention Team, December 2013, highlighting the need for effective teacher practices for improved student performance, including sub-groups. We use formative and summative data in order to inform our curricula. Additionally, have seamless and cohesive lessons that transcend across the classrooms. We use Socratic Seminar to enhance the student’s thinking processes, as well as higher level questioning. We are moving forward with including multiple entry points within all lessons to target our various students’ needs. The students are thoughtfully tiered into groups so that they can receive instruction that is specific to their leanings needs. We will continue the implementation of the professional development plan in order expand all teachers’ best practices school wide. We will continue to expand the collaborative inquiry process in order to further address our student’s needs. By creating tasks that match the students entry points we will further provide rigorous learning experiences for all of our scholars. Sub-group population results for the 2016-2017 school year indicate targeted instruction based on the needs of the students is crucial for this group to meet the standards. Teacher teams have been planning since July 2017, in order to rectify the problem of practice. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? 1. Teachers collaborate daily in content and grade-level teams to plan lessons and discuss common issues. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 35  2. The school week consist of a cycle that includes an A, B, C, and D day. Teachers meet for two or these days in grade-level content teams and for two days in interdisciplinary grade-level teams. Teachers join together for 80 minutes on Mondays for professional development. Parent engagement occurs during the interdisciplinary team meeting 3. The administration is being deliberate in scheduling the time for professional development and time for teacher collaboration initiatives, such as reviewing student work for improvement of instruction, engaging in Collaborative Inquiry processes and having common planning time for instruction purposes. 4. Administrators will support the teacher meetings to ensure that school goals are addressed and include consistency of quality instruction, the use of data and the development of tiered instructional tasks. 5. The school promotes positive behavior through a reward system. Teachers use the RESPECT for All forum to remind students of proper behavior and create a climate of community. Students are given daily opportunity to participate in class discussions thus ensure that the classroom is a safe environment. 6. Teachers use daily conferencing, exit slip, and end unit assessment to plan for individual student needs. Teacher teams will follow the protocol of the Collaborative Inquiry process. Through the cycles we will identify students’ strength and need, which will enable teachers plan for individual needs. 7. Teachers will recognize the individual needs and experiences of students, and work together to better understand and support those divers needs., NYCDOE, Overview of the Framework for Great Schools. How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? The instructional cabinet is comprised of teacher leaders from each core content area for each grade plus the administrative team. With a minimum of 15 participants, this team identifies the standards to be targeted during Expanded Learning Time. This team is also responsible for constructing teacher resources and observing teacher practices to ensure all actionable next steps are precise. Using the cycle of inquiry, teachers on the school wide inquiry team use the philosophy of Data Wise to impact both teacher practices and student outcomes. (1.1, 1.2, 1.4, 4.2) How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? The school is programmed using block scheduling as a means to ensure teacher teams meet every other day. Following block schedule - Using an A, B, C, and D day cycle, teachers are programmed to meet with content and interdisciplinary teams on A/C and B/D days respectively . Teachers work together for 80 minutes on Mondays during professional development and on D days during interdisciplinary team meetings to maintain parent outreach during the school year. (1.2, 4.2) How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Teacher teams implement the tasks designed and formulated during the instructional team/extended cabinet meetings. Content team and interdisciplinary teams will deepen their action research by identifying the power standards. Making sure in content team meetings that the "power standards" are embedded within the units of study, Engage NY modules presented, and scope and sequence documents created for all content areas. (1.2,4.2) What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 36  Data Reviewed Intent Mastery Connect Assessment Results Monitoring and adjusting "what is taught" based on the outcomes revealed during the analysis of data Benchmark tool Instructional resources will support students in their specific area(s) of need Ready Assessment Results iReady Assessment Results Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, 80% of the 60 member ADVANCE rated teacher staff will be receive “Effective” or above based on the Measure of Teacher Practice (MOTP) as calculated and quantified by the ADVANCE SYSTEM. Specifically aligned to indicators (1e) and (3c), TEACHERS WILL BE MEASURED BY THEIR OVERALL RATINGS IN DOMAINs I AND III. Emphasis on planning coherent education (1e) and Engagement in Student learning (3c) will be the core of each domain. 75% of the combined ratings for the before mentioned indicators (1e, 3c) must be effective during the 2018-2019 school year . Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Collaborative Teachers Rigorous Instruction Collaborative Inquiry 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 37 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Teachers Rigorous Instruction Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal and assistant principals Observation reports Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Daily informal and informal observations are done in pairs(informal observations) and individually on an ongoing basis. Classroom Observations ● Full-period formal ● Partial-period informal ● Full-period informal - Actionable feedback is given to teachers along with an improvement plan that includes actionable expectations. Follow-up informal observations occur within two weeks. Teacher Feedback a. Written b. Oral (via teacher meetings) c. Areas of strength / quality elements d. Areas for growth / needs 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 38  e. Specific, targeted next steps Principal, assistant principals and IEP teacher will work directly with grade and subject area teams to ensure the units of study are in alignment with Common Core Learning Standards - Principal, assistant principals, district supervisory staff, and teachers will facilitate PD activities for all teachers including ELLs and SWDs teachers. Aligned Professional Development 1. For Teachers A. Rubric Domains ● Planning and Preparation ● The Classroom Environment ● Instruction ● Professional Responsibilities B. Targeted professional sessions based on individual and group needs and trends C. Rubric norming and calibration 2. For supervisors ● Rubric norming ● Cultivating and delivering effective 2018-19 RSCEP-PF Teacher Leaders, Teachers Collaborative Teachers August 2018 to June 2019 Principal and assistant principals Google minute notes Teacher evaluation forms 39  feedback; targeting next steps ● Data analysis ● Data, Monitoring, and Revision A. Program effectiveness B. Data analysis i. Limited English Proficient Learners-will be tracked using NYSESLAT, ARIS, NYS ELA/MATH Assessments, Acuity and teacher formal and informal assessments. ii. Students With Disabilities- will be tracked using student portfolios, IEP’s and NYS ELA/MATH Assessments. ● Tracking growth over time ● Identifying growth areas ● Targeting professional learning ● Analyzing impact on student achievement Review of overall observation data by means of ADVANCE reports that are available to central, district, and school supervisory staff. Rigorous Instruction Parents, Families, Guardians 1. Parent workshops that are ongoing to support family engagement and inform parents and families of the CCLS, school wide Principal, assistant principals, teachers, CBO supervisory staff, and parent coordinator Parent Attendance August 2018 Sept. 2018 to June 2019 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 40  expectations, and community related concerns 1. Professional developments/ Workshops that are ongoing to support teachers, inform parents and families of the CCLS, school wide expectations, and community related concerns. Parents and Teachers Rigorous Instruction Collaboration August 2018 Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, teachers, CBO supervisory staff and parent coordinator Parent Attendance Teacher feedback 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Ongoing parent events and workshops will target specified topics related to effective parenting will be facilitated by the parent coordinator regularly during the 2018-2019 school year. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Scheduled meetings, conferences and classroom visits during the school day for share best practices. 2. Scheduled meetings, conferences and classroom visits during the school day for share best practices. 3. Scheduled time during the school day and after school for common planning. 4. Scheduled time during the school day and after school for PDs activities. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 1. A deep dive analysis of the ADVANCE data in February 2019 as compared to October 2018 data captured in the ADVANCE system. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 41  2. Improved teacher practices that are aligned to the Common Core Curriculum Standards as measured by informal and formal observation data. 3. Professional development activities that includes 100% attendance and the analysis of PD evaluations that includes actionable responses to scores of 2 and below. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance data. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 42  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? An area of strength here at IS339 is that our leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP. The school leaders implement structures that include the Annual Professional Performance Review for teachers and Assistant Principal practices. The school leader attends meetings with the school council and school committees, including the School Leadership Team (SLT) and Parent Association (PA). Additionally, our school leaders organize and administer professional development based on student and teacher’s needs. In order to improve we will continue to develop an effective communication plan to educate all stakeholders about the school’s focused vision and precise improvement goals, including a plan for all stakeholders to participate in the assessment of progress made towards the goals. Furthermore, we will work on developing an overarching system to guide the targeted provision of expanded supports and programs in the school, including high quality PD to maximize staff capacity to meet all areas of student academic and social-emotional needs. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 43  1. The school leader articulates a shared vision and mission to the entire school community by addressing the specific components of the leadership. Such as daily reminder that “Failure is not an option … because success is the only option.” "Keep Your EYES on the Prize." These are the “mottos” of the school. As a Renewal School, IS 339 is now partnered a CBO, as part of the renewal school process. The Community Based Organization(CBO) , is highly recommended by the Department of Education. The CBO and the school will collaborate in developing a stronger link of communication that will support the process of crafting the Renewal Comprehensive Educational Plan for IS 339. 2. The Principal, in conjunction with the Professional Development Committee, of IS 339 will continue to implement a yearly school calendar for Professional Learning. Professional Development will take place externally as well as internally. Selected teachers will attend Teacher’s College (for Writing) and in Mathematics Hunter College (for the Title IIB Grant) in order to develop best practices within the content areas of English Language Arts and Mathematics. STEM training for teachers of science continues this school year. Social studies teachers are also attending content specific professional development aligned to the Teacher's College model. 3. Student and Teacher programs align to ensure best matches and student/teacher performance. This action is taken based on the previous year's data results. 4. The school leaders will develop an evaluation process that will include initial conference for both informal and formal observation. During the pre and post conference observation, principal and assistant principal will provide guidance and feedback to teachers with actionable next steps. 5. The school will support a shared accountability through ATS, Online incident report, teacher conference, parent engagement communication, assemblies in order to create action plan for individual students. 6. The principal is committed to the distributive leadership model. Teacher leaders will participate in bi-weekly meetings with the Principal and or APs to ensure teacher influence on planning. The administrative team supports professional advancement for staff by providing guidance, development opportunities and advice, NYCDOE ~ Overview of the Framework for Great Schools, January 2015. The Community School Director will be responsible for upholding the school's mission and vision while also deepening the work of the school during after school and Saturday club/small group instruction. On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? (1.4, 4.1, 5.1) CONTINUING TO EXPAND THE SCHOOL COMMUNITY CULTURE AND THE IMPLEMENTATION OF COMPREHENSIVE STRATEGIES TO PROMOTE A SAFE CLIMATE AND THE PERSONAL AND ACADEMIC GROWTH OF STUDENTS. PROMOTE MEANINGFUL VOICE OF STUDENTS AND ADULTS IN SCHOOL DECISIONS. IMPLEMENTATION OF DE-ESCALATION PROCEDURES AND STRATEGIES TO INCLUDE RESTORATIVE JUSTICE PRACTICES. CONTINUE TO ENSURE THAT THE OBSERVATION PROCESS IS YIELDING IMPROVEMENTS IN TEACHING AND LEARNING. EXPAND THE SYSTEM TO EVALUATE THE SCHOOL'S INSTRUCTIONAL CORE, USING FINDINGS TO COMMUNICATE EXAMPLES OF STRENGTHS, AREAS OF NEEDS AND CLEAR NEXT STEPS FOR ADJUSTMENTS. What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES WILL ENSURE THAT ALL STAKE HOLDERS ARE NORMED AND UNDERSTAND THE SCHOOL'S VISION, MISSION, AND INSTRUCTIONAL FOCUS. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 44  What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? (2) MODEL TEACHERS CONTINUE ON STAFF DURING THE 2018-2019 SCHOOL YEAR. TWO INTERNAL CANDIDATES have ASSUMED THE ROLE AS MODEL TEACHER IN THE SUBJECT AREA OF ELA AND MATH. One additional ENL MODEL Teacher will be added to the Table of Organization. ADDITIONALLY, THERE IS ONE CONTENT FACILITATOR PER GRADE. TEACHER LEADERS ALSO SERVE AS THE REPRESENTATIVE FOR THEIR TEAM FOR THE INSTRUCTIONAL TEAM/EXTENDED CABINET. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? THE SCHOOL LEADERSHIP TEAM IS THE CORE GROUP OF INDIVIDUALS THAT SERVE AS THE SCHOOL'S FIRST COLLABORATIVE. THIS TEAM INCLUDES ALL CONSTITUENTS AND MEETS REGULARLY TO ENSURE CLEAR COMMUNICATION AND COLLABORATION ARE THE NORM. How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy DAILY VERBAL 48-72 HOURS CALIBRATION WITH ASSISTANT PRINCIPALS WEEKLY What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) OBSERVATION REPORTS ADVANCE SYSTEM, GRAPHS, CHARTS PRINCIPAL, ASSISTANT PRINCIPALS MASTERY CONNECT DATA INSTRUCTIONAL TEAM ADMINISTRATIVE TEAM AND TEACHER LEADERS How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? Programming occurs with smaller class sizes to ensure a lower ratio of students to teachers in the classrooms. In this way, instruction and student outcomes continues to improves as measured by ADVANCE data and student data results. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, Administrators and teachers participate in content specific and collaborative team meetings for a minimum of twice per week in order to ensure accelerated student learning and teacher development. This will also impact reflective practices and the consistent implementation of professional learning experiences as teachers meet with their content and interdisciplinary team. The implementation of the data wise protocols through collaborative inquiry will further provide evidences of accelerated learning and teacher development.. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 45  This goal will be measured by an increase by 10% of effective ratings in ADVANCE specifically aligned to the combined components (3b, 3c, 3d), Well Developed scores for School Quality Review indicators (1.1, 1.2, 3.4), and student work products that include rubrics and or checklist that confirm student learning. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Rigorous Instruction Collaborative teachers Community School Model 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 46  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Teachers Rigorous Instruction Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal and assistant principals Ongoing Advance data Teachers Collaborative Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal and assistant principals Google Doc minutes Documented formal and Informal observations and inter class-visitations that include actionable feedback to teachers with emphasis on the entire C. Danielson Rubric (PPR APG). -School leaders will work during the school day, after school and during the summer to align the Danielson framework with the curriculum units and tasks to the CCLS in all content areas within the components 3b, 3c, 3d. Teacher Team meetings to support teacher effectiveness and our response to data (assessment results and student work) as a school wide initiative (PD, DB). 2.2, 4.2 Collaborative Inquiry meetings – to improve teacher practices and meet the needs of all students. 1.2, 2.2, 4.2 -Content Team teacher team meetings – to support teacher understanding of the city wide instructional shifts and the CCLS (Reading, Writing, Speaking/Listening, and Language) in both the written 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 47  unit/daily plan and in pedagogy (TG). 1.1, 2.2, 4.2 Parent workshop that will support family engagement and inform parents and families of the CCLS, School wide expectations, and community related concerns. Workshops/professional learning experiences that will support teachers engagement and inform parents and families of the CCLS, School wide expectations, and community related concerns. Parents Rigorous Instruction August 2018 to June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, teachers, CBO, and parent coordinator Teachers and Parents Collaborative Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, teachers, and CBO, parent coordinator Rigorous Instruction Parent Attendance Student improvement in homework Teacher evaluation for Professional learning experiences 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Ongoing parent events and workshops will target specified topics related to effective parenting will be facilitated by the parent coordinator regularly during the 2018-2019 school year. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Scheduled time during the school day for individual conference with each teacher and administrator (pre- and post conference 2. Time for professional development during school and after school time 3. Scheduled meetings during the school day for share best practices and analyze data 4. Scheduled meetings during the school day for share best practices and analyze data 5. Scheduled meetings during the school day for share best practices and analyze data 6. Time for professional development during school and after school time Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 48  Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 1. By January 2019, two supervisory observations with actionable feedback to teachers with emphasis on the Domain 2 and 3 will show improvement in teacher practices and student work products based on the following processes listed below. ~ Teachers participate in content and interdisciplinary team meetings daily. Meeting minutes are housed in GOOGLE DOCS. ~ Completion of a minimum of three DATA WISE/MEETING WISE ~ collaborative inquiry cycles during the 2018-2019 school year. Meeting minutes housed in GOOGLE DOC. ~ Teachers participate in at least of one professional learning experience weekly as evidenced by agendas and sign in sheets. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ADVANCE online system and GOOGLE DOCS meeting minutes. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 49  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? ● We, as a school community, will continue to develop our outreach to families and the community. We have implemented monthly calendars, monthly workshops, a communication system (telephone, email, and Engrade), as well as assisting families with crisis intervention through the ASTOR clinic which is located within this building. We are using our Century 21 Grant to include Oasis in our building which provide after school academic and recreational support. Additionally, during our Saturday Academy we administer a program which teaches adults the English Language. Yearly, we have a Family day to promote community involvement with the school. Curriculum nights are included in order set high expectations and establish school wide-goals. ● In order to continue to develop our implementation of communication, we plan to implement a plan to communicate with families about the high academic expectations of the school. Additionally, we plan on collaborating with the district to develop protocols to make all school to home communications available in the home languages of the families served. As well as, provide all staff with explicit PD and job embedded follow up to support their capacity to develop and sustain partnerships with parents and families. Finally, we will work towards developing systems to enable all staff to regularly provide data to families about student progress in their home languages, and provide parents and families with the opportunity to learn to access and interpret the data to advocate for their child. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 50  1. The entire school community is committed to empower families and ultimately, the community. Parent empowerment and the continuation of building a strong partnership with community based organizations in order to expand school activities. Families are welcome into the school and are made a part of the school community through visitation to the classroom. School safety officers greet families upon their entrance. They are ask for identification and then escorted to the main office. In the main office they will be greeted again and ask them about their purpose for the visit. Then they will be directed to the specific personnel. 2. The school provide support to families so that they understand and can take an active role in what their child is learning through academic celebration, curriculum night, parent/teacher conference and an open door policy to sit in their child’s class. 3. The school empowers the community and families through family day, ongoing father’s forums, mother day celebration and 4-5 assemblies. Teachers are encouraged to participate in these activities to meet and greet the family. Teachers communicate frequently with parents. 4. Families partner with the school and CBO to support student success through extracurricular services and therapy. Space is been provided in the school building to meet this need. 5. Bronx Works at IS 339 will serve the entire student body. Services to be provided will include mental health services, physical health services coordination, family literacy activities, extended learning, and academic enrichment. 6. The school is currently offering educational opportunities for student’s families. The school offers English classes to parents on Saturdays and Adult Education classes continue for parents on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays. 7. Teachers effectively communicate regularly with parents and families. Teachers communicate to families about the support needed to advance the school mission/vision, and THE NYCDOE ~ Overview of the Framework for Great Schools. Parents empowerment includes invitations to meetings and workshops in order to become clear in regards to the expectations for all students. Parent workshops also include hands on learning experiences for parents and families to provide empowerment and clarity regarding "what is being taught/learned" at IS39. Electronic and hard copy communications are sent home multiple times during the week so that all correspondences are received. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? The goal is to empower community and family partners in all school activities. Families are always welcome into the school and are made a part of the school community through ongoing Learning Walks- visitations to the classroom with teams of constituents. School safety agents (SSA) warmly greet families upon their entrance. As per the citywide protocols, SSAs request identification and then escort visitors to the main office. In the main office, all visitors are greeted with respect and directed to the specific department or personnel. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 51 The school provides support to families so that they understand and can take an active role in what their child is learning through academic celebration, curriculum night, parent/teacher conference and an open door policy to sit in their child’s class. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? The staff communicates regularly with parents and families. Teachers communicate with families about what is being taught and the support needed to advance the school vision and mission. The NYCDOE ~ Overview of the Framework for Great Schools, January 2015 was shared with all of the stakeholders during the first SLT meeting and professional development experience in September 2016 and 2017. Parents are invited to meetings and workshops over time (at least once per month) in order to become aware of the expectations for our students and so that parents and families understand their role over the course of the school year. Workshops also include hands on learning experiences for parents and families to provide a better understanding of "what is being taught/learned" at IS339. Electronic and hard copy communications are sent home multiple times during the week so that all correspondences are received. Parent empowerment is our ongoing focus and goal for all families. What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale ESL and Adult Education Classes NYCDOE Campus Events (Father's Fourm, Mother's Forum, Classroom Management Strategies, Curriculum/Instruction/Assessments, Family Day Community School Model To educate and empower parents and families to expand their opportunities for employment Ongoing events to build trust and understanding of the school wide expectations in addition tot he supports that are available within the school Bronx Works will support parents and families to provide additional resources from within the community. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: ASTOR Family partnerships with CBO: Bronx Works Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? YES What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? The NYCDOE division of Adult Education serves parents and families within the community. Currently and for the last 2 years, Adult Education classes are offered here on Tuesdays through Fridays 6:30-9:30pm. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 52  The Renewal Benchmark Update will be shared with the SLT and entire staff during the first meetings/professional development session to be held in September 2018. During the school year, the SlT will receive updates based on our receivership status and improvements confirmed by iReady. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase parental empowerment (245 to 264 families) in the areas of participation, communication and decision making as measured by the School Environment Section of the 2018 School Quality Snapshot that includes parent event attendance records and meeting minutes housed in GOOGLE DOCS. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Implement Community School Model Rigorous Instruction Collaboration 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 53  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Parents Community School Model Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, assistant principal, parent coordinator, parents, and teachers Parental engagement attendance sheets CBO Documented feedback from parents by means of ongoing surveys 1. The PIP and Title I committees will work with the school to implement the following: a. I.S. 339 will take the following actions to involve parents in the joint development of its school parental involvement plan under section 1112 of the ESEA: i. Solicit opinions/interest of parents at PA meetings ii. Online and paper surveys to help in planning, review and improvement of the school’s programs iii. Provide copies of policy/compact to all parents b. I.S. 339 will take the following actions to involve parents in the process of school review and improvement under section 1116 of the ESEA: i. Parents will be involved in reviewing and modifying the parent 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 54  policy through monthly PA & SLT meetings c. I.S. 339 will provide the following necessary coordination, technical assistance, and other support in planning and implementing effective involvement activities to improve student academic achievement and school performance: i. Parents will be informed of all parent workshops and activities by: ● School website ● E-Mail ● School calendar ● Parents’ Association monthly meeting ● Reminder letters and phone calls, including “auto- ● dialer” messages d. I.S. 339 will coordinate and integrate Title 1 parental involvements strategies with parental involvement strategies under the following other programs: i. Parent Workshops (behavior management, computer skills, homework tips, nutrition, Middle School Initiative, test sophistication, connected learning) ii. Title 1 City and State Data Report Meetings 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 55 Special Education and ELL’s parents and teachers Community School Model Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, assistant principal, parent coordinator, parents, and teachers School Climate Committee will engage the staff in surveys CBO Parents and Teachers community School Model Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, assistant principal, parent coordinator, parents, and teachers Ongoing Surveys and Feedback CBO 2. I.S. 339 will take the following actions to conduct, with the involvement of parents, an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parental involvement policy and activities (with particular attention to parents of students who are economically disadvantaged, are disables, have limited English proficiency, have limited literacy, or are off any racial or ethnic background) The School will use the findings of the evaluation about it parents involvement policy and activities to design strategies for more effective parental involvement, and to revise, if necessary (and with the involvement of parents) its parental involvement policies. ● Solicit opinions of parents at PA and SLT meetings o Parent Workshops / Activity Surveys 2. I.S. 339 will build the school’s and parents’ capacity for strong parental involvement, in order to ensure effective parent involvement of parents to support a partnership with the parents and the community to improve student academic achievement, through the following activities specifically described below: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 56  a. The school will provide assistance to parents of children served by the school, as appropriate, in the understanding topics such as the following, by undertaking the actions describe in this paragraph-- i. the State’s academic content standards, ii. the State’s student academic achievement iii. standards, iv. the state and local academic assessments v. including alternate assessments b. Part A, how to monitor their child’s progress, and how to work with educators: i. Signing School Compact ii. Parent Orientation Meetings iii. OpenHouse iv. November/March Parent/Teacher Conferences v. Parent Educational Workshops vi. Website links vii. Test sophistication workshops c. The school will, with the assistance of its parents, educate its teachers, pupil services 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 57 personnel, principal, and other staff in how to reach out to, communicate with, work with parents as equal partners in the value and utility of contributions of parents, and in how to implement and coordinate parent programs and build ties between parents and schools, through: I. Team Conferences II. Curriculum Conferences III. Professional Development Trainings 2. The school will provide materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their children’s academic achievement, such as literacy training and using technology, as appropriate, to foster parent involvement, through: a. Open and constant access to the Parent Coordinator b. Parent Resource Center c. Parent Workshops for Literacy and Math d. Curriculum Parent Workshops e. Family Literacy Workshops f. f. Technology Training for Parents Parents and Teachers Community School Model Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, assistant principal, parent coordinator, parents, and teachers Surveys and Parent Feedback CBO 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 58  Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Common planning time for Principal, assistant principal, parent coordinator, teachers and other staff members. 2. Two Open School Afternoon and Evening sessions per year 3. Two curriculum sessions per year 4. Monthly workshops 5. Family Day Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Parent empowerment will be tracked and monitored by their participation in all parent activities, including SLT meetings, PA meetings, Parent/Teacher Conferences, Curriculum Night, Saturday Academy, Parent Activities, Ramapo for Children workshops, (classes, forums, Family Day, learning walk), teacher outreach to parents on Tuesday afternoons, and school website track form. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent feedback and attendance documents. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 59  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. The purpose of this document is to provide initial thoughts as to how the CBO and IS 339 will carry out the Extended Learning Time (ELT) Portion of the community school at the 1600 Webster Avenue campus. It is important to note, that as the primary Community Based Organization (CBO) provider for IS 313 and IS 339, the CBO partner will work with the principals at both schools to integrate and leverage the community school resources as much as possible. That said, each school will have its own unique set of needs which may require nuances in the model in order to meet the needs of both schools. For example, IS 313 has recently been awarded a SONYC after school grant but IS 339 does not have that additional resource thus, the allocation of resources for ELT will be different for the two schools, while at the same time every effort will be made to establish economy of scale in the best interest of both schools in the building. Part 1 – ELT Summative Program Goal(s) Extended learning time will provide every student in the school academic support, remediation and/or enrichment that is facilitated in an engaging manner which capitalizes on the student’s personal goals and interests. The 2015 – 2017-2018 ELT goals will be as follows: ● 75% of students who participate in academic support, homework help, and or tutoring for 90 minutes after school four days per week for 36 weeks during the course of the school year will show improvement in their core subject areas as measured by increased quarterly grades in ELA, math, science and social studies. ● At least 50% of students at the school will participate in additional 90 minutes of club based activities and/or academic support for a total of 180 minutes at least two days per week, after school, for 28 weeks during the course of the school year Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? X Voluntary Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 60  Participation in 90 minutes of academic support / homework help/tutoring four days per week will be compulsory for all students at the school. Participation in the additional 90 minutes of club based activities and/or academic support will be voluntary and the target will be 50% of the school. The voluntary portion of the ELT program will actively encourage participation by providing students voice and choice with respect to the content and types of activities that will occur. Student interests will be surveyed before determining the nature of after school activities including arts based, recreational and sports related options. Academic support beyond the initial mandatory 90 minutes will utilize project based learning, which will further increase student engagement and interest bin attending. Lastly, the community school contract will provide group and individual incentives for attending such as field trips, group celebrations, and celebratory recognition of achievement. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? The CBO and School staff will craft a schedule of activities that will provide high-interest programming for a minimum of 4 days/week, 2.5 hours/day (360 hours/year), with a 5th day open for scheduled special initiatives such as student showcases, family engagement activities, community meetings, and college and career readiness events. The first hour of ELT will be compulsory for all students at the school and focus on specific academic skill building, review, remediation and acceleration. Programming in the first hour will be provided in conjunction between the school’s teaching staff and Phipps Neighborhoods group leaders and academic specialists. The time will include small group instruction, homework help and academic tutoring. Phipps Neighborhoods staff will participate in the school teacher’s weekly grade team meetings ands planning sessions in order to align the after school content with the school’s curriculum and individual student needs. We will also provide opportunities for students to work with Bronx Works and Phipps Neighborhoods and school staff in preparation for state tests and college entrance exams. The second portion of the after school program will center on project based learning and be structured with club-based, cohort-based, or gender-based groupings. Offerings will be decided in tandem with the school community. Activities may include Music Production, Dance, Leadership, Basketball, Entrepreneurship, Robotics, Brotherhood/Sisterhood Circles, Cooking, and Spoken Word. These activities will be planned with connections to day-2018-19 RSCEP-PF 61  school learning and/or life skills development with a Connected Learning approach, specifically around 21st Century skills of communication, collaboration, and critical thinking. At IS 313/339, the CBO will provide a schedule of activities that addresses the academic and social and emotional needs of the students. Since most students are performing well below proficiency level on state exams in ELA, math and science, we will provide STEM and literacy-based activities that allow students to apply skills they have learned in a recreational environment, such as Robotics, Brain Games, PLUS (Positive Learning Using Sports), and Spoken Word. In order to promote social and emotional learning after school, activities that allow students to discuss real issues that affect their lives, such as bullying, peer pressure, drugs, and alcohol, in a safe environment with their peers will be offered in order to promote healthy social/emotional development and provide students with the skills to deal with conflict, build resilience, and make good choices with guidance from a caring, skilled adult in offerings including Brotherhood/Sisterhood Circles, Team building, and Peer Mediation and Mentoring. To address gaps in arts programming the ELT program will provide opportunities for learning through Drama, Music, Dance, and Visual and/or Performing Arts. Additionally, Phipps Neighborhoods staff is trained to provide Project-Based Learning (PBL) activities with the voice and choice of students driving the content and product of the project, so our staff can support content-area learning by exploring topics of high interest while incorporating literacy, math, science and technology, as well as arts and community engagement. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. There will be a full time ELT coordinator who will oversee the program. In addition to the full time coordinator the school will identify a staff member (to be determined at an upcoming strategy meeting) to work closely with the coordinator to ensure the ELT program is structurally aligned to the academic needs of the school. Phipps Neighborhoods may subcontract a portion of the ELT service previsions to well qualified providers when appropriate and deemed necessary though the needs assessment which will be conducted in tandem with the school. The ELT program’s impact will be evaluated as qualitative and quantitive measures by means of student attendance during the day and after school. Conducting subgroup analysis (grade gains and promotion rates) of all the students who participate in the mandatory ELT program. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Compulsory ELT: September 2017 – June 2018 2017-2018 EXPANDED LEARNING TIME SCHEDULE Day Student School Day/ELT MON 8:20 a.m.-2:40 p.m. ELT Teacher Work Day (including 8:20 a.m. - 2:40 p.m. (PD 2:40 – 4:00 p.m.) Teacher (non-ELT) Work Day 8:20 a.m. - 2:40 p.m. (PD 2:40 – 4:00 p.m.) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 62  TUES 8:20 a.m.-2:40 p.m. /2:40-3:55 p.m. 8:20 a.m.- 2:40 p.m - (ELT): (2:40 - 3:55) 8:20 a.m.- 2:40 p.m. (PE + OPW: 2:40 - 3:55) 8:20 a.m.-2:40p.m. WED /2:40-3:55 p.m. THURS 8:20 a.m.-2:40 p.m./2:40-3:55 8:20 a.m.-2:40 p.m./ 2:40 p.m.- 3:55 p.m. FRI 8:20 a.m.- 2:40 p.m./2:40 – 3:55 (ELT) 8:20 a.m.- 2:40 p.m./2:40 – 3:55 (ELT) 8:20 a.m.-2:40 p.m. 8:20 a.m.-2:40 p.m. 8:20 a.m.- 2:40 8:20 a.m.-2:40 p.m. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. This section cannot be completed until more information is provided by DOE with respect to the teacher’s contractual involvement in providing extended day instruction. That being said Phipps Neighborhoods and the school agree to collaborate with one another to appropriately staff and budget for the above described ELT program. Ideally, the school’s teachers will be the primary instructors for the compulsory portion of ELT with staff providing supplemental support (push in and pull out during that time) and staff or subcontractors will be the primary service providers for the voluntary portion of the ELT program. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) Tax Levy Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks In January 2019 at least 60% of students who have 100% attendance in the compulsory portion of ELT will show improvement in their core academic subject areas. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. iReady Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 63  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, Bronx Works Community Based Organization at IS 339 will have the employ the four components of the community school model-family engagement, mental and physical health services, extended learning and academic enrichment, and community engagement-to promote academic achievement for all students. Using benchmarks obtained through the needs assessment process, by July 2018, the Community School will conduct ten (10) family engagement activities that will increase parental awareness and understanding of the school’s curriculum and how parents can support their children’s education. Using benchmarks obtained through the needs assessment process, by July 2018, the Community School will provide mental health services specific to the needs of students utilizing a combination of community partners and community school personnel. Using benchmarks obtained through the needs assessment process, by July 2018, the Community School will engage a medical provider to provide annual screenings and preventative services to students. Using benchmarks obtained through the needs assessment process, by July 2018, the Community School will provide academic enrichment to at least 50% of the student body as measured by program attendance. Using benchmarks obtained through the needs assessment process, by July 2018, the Community School will have a fully operational leadership team comprised of local CBOs, parents, local business partners, and community members. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Safety Implement Community School Model Collaboration Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Bronx Works Bronx Works Chronically Absent Students Mentors to support daily attendance At risk students Social-Emotional Supports for children and families 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 64 Bronx Works Bronx Works ELT students Tutors to support small group instruction Open to 60 students After school clubs Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. IS 339 has partnered with Bronx Works to meet the requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. The principal, members of the SLT, and Bronx Works staff will work collaboratively to hire a Community School Director through a joint interview/screening process. The Community Director will coordinate the needs assessment process by reviewing relevant school data, interviewing school leadership, and conducting student, teacher, and parent surveys. Collectively, the community school leadership team will analyze the data and develop a strategy for goal achievement. The strategy will include extended learning and mental health services, as well as other elements illuminated from the needs assessment. The community school leadership team will provide guidance and oversight for the work that at the Community School. This team will be integrally involved in strategy decisions and program delivery. Parents, students, community members, instructional staff, the principal, and the community school director will comprise the leadership team. The team will meet monthly to discuss strategy and programming. The community school director will participate in weekly student support and attendance meetings with school personnel to review attendance and student concerns. Using the student sorter to extrapolate attendance, testing, and behavioral data, these meetings will serve to focus on trends and develop intervention strategies to address troubling trends as they arise. The director and school principal will also meet regularly to review progress of the work and implementation. Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 65  Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Implementation of the Community School will be the responsibility of the Community School Director. The director will work in tandem with the school principal to oversee the work as prescribed by the community school strategy. The director will be supervised by the Community Schools Managing Director at Phipps Neighborhoods. Weekly supervision sessions will provide guidance support to the work. Additional personnel, both school and community partners will be determined by the strategy informed by the needs assessment. Phipps Neighborhoods will work alongside the school personnel to design the ELT program to provided academic support. Impact on student achievement will be measured by standardized test scores and report card data. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Resources needed include a community school director and office space for community program personnel. Additionally, personnel to deliver ELT, academic enrichment, mental health, and parent engagement activities are needed. Professional development for program and school staff that reinforces the new community school model is needed, as well. An extension of the school day to include the additional hour for ELT would be ideal to ensure maximum participation. Instructional needs will be determined upon completion of the needs assessment. DUE DATE 6/8/17 Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. TASK Complete Mental Health Assessment Community Schools Director confirmed for the 2017-2018 school year 6/30/17 7/15/17 First Community Leadership Meeting Complete Needs Assessment 7/15/17 7/20/17 Complete Program Workscope 8/15/17 Hire Relevant Personnel Professional Development 8/31/17 Begin Programming 9/8/17 Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 66  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Push-in to assist lower level performance students Mathematics Push-in to assist lower level performance students 2018-19 RSCEP-PF Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) -Reading A-Z System 44 IMAGINE LEARNING I-Ready MY-ON -Socratic Seminar/practice Regents Prep Course Crosswalk ENGAGE NY MODULES- 5 Practices of Mathematics - Delivered in both small group and tutoring settings -Pull-out during the school day and extra-curricular -Delivered in small groups - Delivered in small groups - After-school, on Saturdays, and Vacation Academies - Pull-out and push-in during the school day -After school, on Saturdays, and Vacation Academies -Delivered in small groups In school and at home Individual/Small group -Whole group -Delivered in small groups -Delivered in small groups -Whole group -Delivered in small groups -School day -Before-school starts -Pull-out and push-in during the school day -School day -After school, on Saturdays, and Vacation Academies 67  Science Push-in to assist lower level performance students Social Studies Push-in to assist lower level performance students At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Push-in to assist lower level performance students in all content areas Socratic Seminar/practice I-Ready GlencoveTextbooks - Delivered in both small group and tutoring settings - Depth of Knowledge Questioning Techniques - Delivered in both small group and tutoring settings - Costa’s Questioning - Socratic Seminar/practice - Cornell Note Taking -Passages - Delivered in both small group and tutoring settings -Delivered in both small group and tutoring settings - Delivered in both small group and tutoring settings -Depth of Knowledge Questioning Techniques -Delivered in both small group and tutoring settings - Costa’s Questioning - Socratic Seminar/practice - Delivered in both small group and tutoring settings -Delivered in both small group and tutoring settings - History Alive - Pull-out and push-in during the school day - Pull-out and push-in during the school day -Pull-out and push-in during the school day -Pull-out and push-in during the school day -Pull-out and push-in during the school day -Pull-out and push-in during the school day -Pull-out and push-in during the school day -Pull-out and push-in during the school day -Cornell Note Taking - Guidance Counseling - One-to-One Student Counseling - Delivered weekly, during the school day -Parent Conferences -Held as needed -During the school day and after school -Mental Health -Issued based on need and emergent circumstances 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 68  Referrals/Phipps/ Astor -Throughout the school year 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 69  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 99 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students and parents initially receive transportation reimbursements until busing is finalized. Counseling and or other supports are given to families as referrals upon request. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 70  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 71  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Attracting Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) ● Ongoing professional development in Teacher Effectiveness ● Lab-site” classrooms for teachers with rubric-based exemplary practices ● Classroom inter-visitations to highlight and disseminate rubric-based best practices, teacher rounds ● Team leader and Content Facilitator cabinets to foster communication and planning between teachers and administration ● Support of the MOTP/MOSL Specialists ● Opportunities for teachers to facilitate professional development for colleagues in areas of strength, aligned to school- wide deficiencies or trends of need 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Teacher Professional Development: ● New Teacher Center ● Tuition Reimbursements ● Teacher’s college ● Differentiated Professional Development ● Based on teacher professional goals, classroom observations, staff needs analyses 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 72  ● Leadership Opportunities for teachers ● Administrative internships ● Content Area Facilitators (Small Learning Communities) Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Funding Amount Indicate the amount Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 73  Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 491,222.00 0 20,686.00 0 4,911,680.00 purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 74   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 75  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental empowerment and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent empowermentment program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. I.S. 339, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students IS 339 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 76  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and empower parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 77  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) I.S. 339, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 78  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 79  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 80  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 81  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 82 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 83  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: Our large student ELL population has repeatedly scored in both the bottom percentiles of our school and New York City. Based on measurements we conducted during this school year, such as System 44, i-Ready and Keystone Diagnostics Test the ELL population need support in reading, speaking and especially in writing. To support these learners for the 2018 ELA State Exam and NYSESLAT, we will implement an After School Program, and Saturday Academy to support our English Language Learning students. The programs will serve students in each grade level ranging from 6th through 8th grade. We will focus on recently arrived students and students performing at the three lowest levels of ELL development: Entering, Emerging and Transitioning. The targeted instructions will focus on writing, using material from Inside the USA curriculum, by the National Geographic Learning. The Saturday Academy will run from Saturday, October 27th, 2018 through Saturday, May 4th, 2019, for 3 hours from 9:00am- 12:00pm for 16 sessions: (1) ENL teacher and (1) dual certified ENL/ELA teacher. October 2018: 27 November 2018: 13, 10, 17 December 2018: 1, 8, 15, 22 January 2019: 5, 12, 19, 26 February 2019: 2, 9, 16 March 2019: 2, 9, 16, 23, 30 April 2019: 6, 13 May 2019: 4 The After School Program will run Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursdays from November 14th, 2018 through May 3rd, 2019. Three licensed ENL teachers will facilitate this learning program. For the first half of the year the program will run for one hour from 4:00pm- 5:00pm, November 14th, 2018 until February 15th, 2019, then resume February 27th, 2019 until May 3rd, 2019 for two hours from 4:00pm- 6:00pm for 65 sessions: November 2018: 3, 4, 9, 10, 11, 16, 17, 18, 23, 24, 25, 30, 31 January 2019: 1, 7, 8, 13, 14, 15, 20, 21, 27, 28, 29 February 2019: 6, 7, 12, 13, 14, 26, 27, 28 March 2019: 5, 6, 7, 12, 13, 14, 19, 20, 21, 26, 27 April 2019: 2, 3, 4, 9, 10, 11, 16, 17, 18, 30 May 2019: 1, 2, For both the Saturday Academy and After School program, a letter will be sent home to the parent/guardian, another letter will be given to the student themselves and a phone call to the parent/guardian in English, Spanish and French. Attendance will be taken and monitored weekly to note any inconsistencies with participation. The Saturday Academy will target all ENL students. Students are served by the ENL and dual certified ELA/ENL teachers. Differentiated instructional models will be used to support students 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 84  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information There will be one ENL teachers available along with one dual certified ELA/ENL teachers. The students will be grouped by level with one ENL teacher per level for every 15 ELLs for the after school program. On Saturdays student groups will be differentiated with ALL students to address ELA proficiency levels. Newcomers and or students who will not be tested will received direct ENL instruction by way of Rosetta Stone, Imagine Learning and or System 44. The After School program will target the following proficiency levels: Transitioning and Expanding. There will be two ENL teachers available along with one Bilingual ELA teacher. The students will be grouped by level with one ENL teacher per level for every 15 ELLs. Both programs will offer home language support services for students that speak languages other than English. Dictionaries, thesaurus, including translation and interpretation services, in additionally, thirty site licences for Rosetta Stone will utilized to support additional instruction to ELLs from different languages. ELLs will also engage in meaningful units found on the National Geographic Learning INSIDE curriculum, The Pearson True Stories Beginner and Intermediate reader curriculum as well as NYSESLAT preparation material, which is supplemental and not utilized during regularly scheduled instruction. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: In order to support as many ELL students and their varying needs as possible, all participating teachers must be highly qualified and equipped with tools to do so. The three ENL teachers and Foreign Language teacher will meet biweekly beginning October 5th, 2017, after school from 4:00pm-5:00pm in the library. At these meetings, the teachers will discuss instructional expectations, parental engagement, assessments and compliance. Monthly, on Mondays, during staff professional development, all teachers will receive professional development regarding ENL instructional strategies by the ENL Liaison, Ms. Reyes. There will an agenda, handout and sign in sheet. All of these professional developments are no cost to the program. The professional development will focus on ENL integrated classrooms, components of co-teaching Teachers will work on increasing their co-teaching skills by learning about how to: · · · Monday Book Study with Dr. Diaz (2:40pm-4:00pm) After School Monday PD with BFSC (4:00pm-5:00pm) After School Tuesday ENL Meeting 4:00pm-5:00pm ENL Parent Engagement (5:00pm-7:00pm) In house/ Outside ENL/ Bilingual PD’s 12.11.18 1.22.19 Co-Plan (October 2018) Co-Instruct (November 2018) Co-Assess &amp; Co-Reflect (December 2018) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 85  Part C: Professional Development 2.6.19 2.27.19 3.12.19 3.26.19 4.23.19 5.7.19 PENDING DATES TO BE DETERMINED 1.3.18 1.17.18 1.31.19 2.14.19 3.7.19 3.21.19 4.4.19 4.25.19 5.9.19 5.23.19 6.6.19 11.13.18 1.10.19 3.13.19 9.28.18 9.29.18 10.17.18 11.6.18 Teachers will then learn how to utilize data to drive instruction and create ELL modifications (January, February and March 2017). The following data results are used - NYSESLAT, NYSITELL ( for the new comers), SRI for their reading level, ESL baseline (a diagnostic test from System 44 and Imagine learning for newcomers) baseline writing and other teacher made assessments in the classroom. This PD provides examples of alternative materials and activities that can be used to scaffold the instruction for the ELLs on their level. Common Core Aligned Tasks for Classroom Activities (February 2018)). Teachers from across content areas looked closely at the common core standards. They will plan and tailor their lessons and activities based on them. These professional development activities will impact the way the teacher’s instruction the ELLs and how they learn best for their level of proficiency. The students in turn will benefit from these professional developments because they will be able to comprehend complex and rigorous grade level content. All agendas, and other records will be maintained in a binder to be housed in the main office. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · 2018-19 RSCEP-PF rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered 86  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities · · name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: For ELL students to succeed in middle school, in high school, and in life, their parents will have to play a crucial role in their education and intellectual development. To involve as many parents and families as possible in students' learning processes, we will offer a Saturday program that will run from Saturday, November 5, 2016 through Saturday, May 20, 2017, for 3 hours per Saturday. This program will be facilitated by our Parent Coordinator, Mr. Echavarria. The Saturday Academy will run from Saturday, October 13th, 2018 through Saturday, May 4th, 2019, for 3 hours from 9:00am- 12:00pm for 15 sessions: October 2018: 13, 20, 27 November 2018: 5, 16, 30 December 2018: 1, 8, 15 January 2019: 5, 12, 19, 26 February 2019: 2, 9, 16 March 2019: 2, 9, 16, 23, 30 April 2019: 6, 13 The following workshops will be accompanied by an aggressive outreach campaign: 1) Language acquisition for parents and families (Rosetta Stone and System 44 representative presents); parents notified by mailing and auto-dialed invitation (Ongoing; December through April) 2) Test sophistication for parents and families (school administration presents); parents notified by mailing and auto-dialed invitation (three two-hour sessions, in January, February, and March) 3) Connecting Learning between School and Home (school administration presents); parents notified by mailing and auto-dialed invitation (two two-hour sessions, In January and February) 4) Parent and family open houses to celebrate student work and progress (students and teachers present); parents notified by flier, auto-dialed invitations, and mailing (two two-hour sessions, in February and May ) I.S. 339 has both written and oral translation needs in the following languages: Spanish and French. If any other language is presented we will utilize the translation and interpretation unit. Findings will be discussed in SLT meetings, Parent Association meetings and Teacher meetings. These findings will be reported to the school community throughout letters, fliers and meetings will the stakeholders throughout the year. We have on staff at I.S. 339 bi-lingual staff representative of the full spectrum of our student and parent populations available and qualified to translate all written communication (memo’s, notes home to parents, etc…) as well as to serve as oral interpreters when the need arises. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 87 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 88  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 9 School Name IS 339 Borough Bronx School Number 339 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ms. Kim Outerbridge Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Meredith Simson Teacher/Subject Area Mr. Jose Betancourt Teacher/Subject Area Mr.Roberto Crespo/NLA Related-Service Provider Ms. Rizvi- school psych. Superintendent Ms. Leticia Rodriguez- Rosario Assistant Principal Ms. Celeste Ross-Barry Coach School Counselor Mr. Ramon Nunez Parent Ms. Latoya Biggs Parent Coordinator Mr. Ramon Echevarria Field Support Center Staff Member Sabrina Cruz-ELL compliance sp Other (Name and Title) Ms. Angela Kirkish-ENL teacher C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 6 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 89  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 516 Total number of ELLs 152 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 29.46% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2011-12 2011-12 2011-12 K 1 3 4 2 Lang. Spanish Spanish Spanish Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 1 7 1 0 1 1 8 1 1 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 1 1 1 0 0 0 3 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At the beginning of the school year, all students are administered a reading baseline called SRI and the READY reading baseline in November in a printed form. The results of these assessments give teachers data regarding students' reading levels. The results of the SRI are used to assign books to students for in class work, homework, measure their progress, and create reading groups. The SRI and READY data along with the June instructional report, NYSITELL/NYSESLAT results and State exams results are also used to group students during collaborative inquiry to guide instruction across contents. Bilingual students in 01 classes are also administered the Milestone baseline exam which is based on a percentage score and provides ENL teachers with data concerning their English language skills levels in reading, listening and writing. This data is used to provide background information and further guide instruction in the following areas: phonemic awareness, vocabulary 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 90  and grammar, writing conventions and reading comprehension. The results of this assessment, in 7th grade for example, show that most students perform at the 50-75% percentile at the beginning of the school year and in the 75-100% at the end of the school year. In addition to the milestone baseline exam, ENL teachers and content teachers also analyze the NYSITELL/NYSESLAT results from current and past years. This analysis helps to understand the English levels at which students perform. During analysis, total scores are calculated which allows teachers to group the ELL students from low to high. This indicates where students are in perspective areas (Reading, Listening, Speaking and Writing) of the English levels (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding or Commanding). These results are also used to group students for small group instruction and help guide planning and preparation for freestanding ENL as well as integrated lessons. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The structures that are in place to support this effort are Content and interdisciplinary meetings twice a week. During content meetings, teachers of respective contents come together to examine data using the data wise and teacher rounds protocol, where noticing and wondering are discussed which ultimately allows teachers to brainstorm action plans and further analysis. During the interdisciplinary meetings, teachers across content areas come together to analyze data to identify students' strengths and weaknesses around the common core standards. When action plans are created, teachers identify and focus on the standards, skills, strategies and resources to be put in place. During both meetings data is presented and teachers have the opportunity to express their concern as well as possible next steps in assuring students' academic success across content and classes. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate our programs’ success by looking at our students’ end-of-the-year NYSESLAT, ELA and Math scores. We examine students’ most recent score, as well as how much growth they have made on each exam in previous years. Once we have the Periodic Assessment in March, we will be able to compare our students performance on that test to their performance on the NYSESLAT. We also use unit, formal and informal assessments to guide our daily practice. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered, action plans are developed within each respective teams. As previously mentioned, content and inter-disciplinary teams come together to analyze various data across the school and within their content areas to address academic gaps and student strengths and weaknesses around the common core standards. For each individual grade, their is an ENL teacher present that addresses the needs of ELLs within classrooms as well as the data collected from the milestone baseline and NYSITELL/NYSESLAT data results. The action plans include best practices for a given skill or content area, what students have already mastered and still need to master. In regards to what students have mastered, teachers develop ways to maintain students' mastery and in areas where students' do not show mastery, teachers seek new strategies or best practices, resources to improve students' performance around specific contents and standards. We ensure that a child’s second language development is considered in instructional decisions by having all ELLs grouped in an ELL team according to each grade. There are two ELL classes for each grade (01 and 02). All students are grouped heterogeneously in both the o1 and 02 classes and receive ENL services in an integrated-co teaching setting or standalone ENL. The bilingual students at the Entering and Emerging levels receive an additional period of ENL instruction every other day and a home language arts class every day. In addition, each ELL team per grade has an interdisciplinary meeting every other day where teachers from all core subject areas collaborate and ensure that ENL strategies are in practice. ELLs in Special Education and ICT classes also receive integrated co-teaching ENL instruction. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 91  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The way the school uses data to guide instruction for ELLs is by utilizing the data wise and meeting wise protocol. During interdisciplinary and content team meetings, teachers come together to analyze student data to guide instruction and individual student needs. The data wise protocol follows a 9 step process where teachers analyze data from various assessments from the June instructional report, Ready, mastery connect and NYSITELL/NYSESLAT results etc. The data wise and meeting wise protocol helps teachers to identify gaps within the students' academic progress and gives teachers the opportunity to construct action plans to enhance and close the learning gaps found. Each action plan is based on standards not mastered identified and to maintain students' mastery of standards. The action plan includes strategies to help master a specific standard not mastered by students. Once the action plan is put into place, teachers execute it and analyze the data again to see whether students have mastered the target standard (s). 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. To evaluate and inform our ELL programs, we analyze the NYSESLAT test results from current and previous years. In addition, we also analyze the data from the ELA and MATH state tests results to determine the ELLs performance in each specific content area. Also, we utilize in house formal assessments such as baselines, in class assessments (Mid and End of Unit Assessments). 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In order to make adjustments, teachers meet twice a week during interdisciplinary and content team meetings. Assessment findings are disseminated and data is analyzed and used to inform instruction and possible next steps for specific populations. This data is also used to identify student English language performance and individual academic needs. Besides the interdisciplinary and content team meetings, the school’s Extended Cabinet also meets twice a week to look at these data results across the school. This team disseminates the data to inform next steps in instructional practices in closing academic gaps school wide. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The majority of ELLs are grouped by team within their grade and are serviced through integrated or standalone ENL depending on their English language level and mandated minutes needed of ENL instruction. Majority of the ELLs are in the 01 and 02 classes across grades and are mostly serviced through integrated ENL using the team-teaching model. Additionally, the ELLs within the 01 classes receive standalone ENL services twice a week totalling in 90 minutes per week. The ELLs in other classes are serviced either in integrated or standalone ENL. All classes contain ELLs with mix proficiency levels. All ENL services are provided utilizing the mandated allotted minutes per proficiency level. For the other ELLs not in an 01 or 02 class, the ENL teacher has the option of providing integrated or standalone ENL services depending on the number of ELLs in each class per grade. In some instances, standalone services are provided to heterogeneous groups from various classes. In addition, all ELLs are receiving ENL services above the amount required as per their proficiency level. b. TBE program. If applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 92  In the TBE program, most teachers are bilingual and provide instruction in both English and Spanish in an integrated co-teaching setting every day. As previously stated, the ELLs are heterogeneously grouped and receive all content core classes in both languages. The 01 students receive standalone ENL and home language instruction twice a week. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Within our Freestanding ENL program, explicit ENL and ELA are delivered in a co-teaching (team-teaching) setting. An ENL teacher is paired with an ELA teacher to provide integrated ENL every day for 48 or 72 minutes (one or split block) to all ELLs in an 01 and 02 class. The ELLs that are in other classes are serviced through either standalone ENL or integrated ENL based on their English level mandated minutes. In regards to HLA, ELLs in all 01 classes receive a Spanish language class twice a week for a total of 90 minutes. HLA in the TBE program, is also provided throughout the day in all core subject classes for 01 and 02 classes. Each core subject class last for 48-72 minutes (one or split block) where most teachers are bilingual and provide instruction in both languages. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the Freestanding ENL program, the language used is English with occasional translanguaging. The ENL teachers use various ELL strategies to ensure English language acquisition. In the standalone ENL classroom, ENL teachers utilize comprehensible inputs to meet the needs of various ELLs. For example, visuals, gestures, wait time, sentence starters etc. In the core subject classes, teachers mainly speak English and occasionally trans-languaging when needed. To ensure that students meet the demands of NYS Learning Standards, ENL teachers modify core subject (mainly ELA) lessons utilizing the New Language Arts Progressions (NLAP). Other core subject teachers are guided by the ENL teachers during interdisciplinary and content team meetings of how to incorporate the NLAP within their lessons to ensure that all ELLs succeed and meet the standards of NYS Learning standards. In the TBE program, all 01 classes receive the core subject classes in their Native language (Spanish). However, with the input from the ENL teacher, the NLAP is also incorporated to ensure that all students meet the NYS learning standards. Comprehensible inputs are also incorporated in bilingual core classes such as visuals, wait time etc. Besides comprehensible inputs, teachers also make use of other strategies such as chunking of texts, translations etc. In both programs, teachers use process charts, graphic organizers, word walls, learning targets, reading strategies such as annotating, questioning etc. to help ELLs meet the NYS learning standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish speaking students receive the Spanish LAB within 10 days of their arrival, they also receive assessments in their NLA class. The 01 classes receive the option in taking the Math, Social studies and Science state exams in their home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? a. SIFE 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 93  b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. These students are placed in our ENL or TBE programs based on their needs and parental decisions. Whenever possible, literacy development in their native language is ongoing. In addition, targeted academic interventions that accelerate vocabulary and content knowledge are used in the classroom, in holiday and Saturday Academy to close the learning gap of these students. By analyzing the data from their assessments, the NYSESLAT test, and teacher-created tests, we can review and revise individual student instructional plans for student success. Students are also encouraged to attend the ENL after school program where they get an opportunity to receive teacher instructed mini lessons and computerized instruction (imagine learning). b. Our newcomers take the NYSITELL within ten days of their arrival at our school. These students are placed in our ENL or TBE program based on their needs and parental decisions. Whenever possible, literacy development in their native language (if Hispanic) is ongoing. In addition, targeted academic interventions that accelerate vocabulary and content knowledge are used both in the classroom, through integrated and standalone, in holiday and Saturday Academy to hasten English language acquisition for these students. By analyzing the data from their interim assessments, the NYSESLAT test, and teacher-created tests, we can review and revise individual student instructional plans for student success. Mandatory holiday and Saturday Academy for ELLs provide additional opportunities to develop literacy, academic and social skills with a focus on reading and math. All newcomers also receive 45 minutes of intensive ENL every other day, and NLA daily, if they are Spanish speaking. Students are also encouraged to attend the ENL after school program where they get an opportunity to receive teacher instructed mini lessons and computerized instruction (imagine learning). c. Our 4 to 6 year ELL students continue their placement in our ENL or TBE program based on their needs and parental decisions. Whenever possible, literacy development in their native language is ongoing. In addition, targeted academic interventions that accelerate vocabulary and content knowledge are used. By analyzing the data from their interim assessments, the NYSESLAT test, and teacher-created tests, we can review and revise individual student instructional plans for student success. Mandatory holiday and Saturday Academy for ELLs provides additional opportunities to develop literacy, academic and social skills with a focus on reading and math. Students who are deemed to not be making adequate progress may be referred to a school counselor to investigate the necessity of creating an IEP for the student. Students are also encouraged to attend the ENL after school program where they get an opportunity to receive teacher instructed mini lessons and computerized instruction (imagine learning). d. Our long term ELL students continue their placement in our ENL or TBE program based on their needs and parental decisions. Whenever possible, literacy development in their native language is ongoing. In addition, targeted academic interventions that accelerate vocabulary and content knowledge are used. By analyzing the data from their interim assessments, the NYSESLAT, and common content assessments, we can review and revise individual student instructional plans for student success. Mandatory holiday and Saturday Academy for ELLs provide additional opportunities to develop literacy, academic and social skills with a focus on reading and math. Students who are deemed to not be making adequate progress may be referred to a school counselor to investigate the necessity of creating an IEP for the student. Students are also encouraged to attend the ENL after school program where they get an opportunity to receive teacher instructed mini lessons and computerized instruction (imagine learning). e. Former ELLs are placed in general education classes based on their NYS ELA and Math exams. Some are kept on the ELL team according to their testing proficiency, where they continue to receive ENL strategies and modifications as needed. Former ELLs are also encouraged to attend after school and Saturday academy to maintain their English language proficiency. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 94  Our ELL students identified as having special needs are placed in the least restrictive setting in our ENL or TBE program based on their needs and parental decisions. Whenever possible, literacy development in their native language is ongoing. In addition, targeted academic interventions specified in their IEP are used. Holiday and Saturday Academy for ELLs provide additional opportunities to develop literacy, academic and social skills with a focus on reading and math. By analyzing the data from their interim assessments, the NYSESLAT test, and teacher-created tests, we can review and revise IEPs for student success. Instructional approaches and methods include bilingual word walls, use of bilingual Math and Social Studies textbooks, use of multi-leveled texts, use of bilingual glossaries and google translate, graphic organizers, visual aides, kinesthetic activities, incorporation of multimedia into lessons, Reading Plus, Imagine Learning, Rosetta Stone, System 44, IXL, Flocabulary, Cornell notes, Socratic Seminars and the Frayer model. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In order to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment, ENL teachers provide integrated or standalone ENL services. ENL teachers work along the content teachers to ensure that ELL-SWDs are supported with differentiated approaches. Students with disabilities may also be mainstreamed to support language acquisition. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our school places a strong emphasis on reading across the curriculum and the classes serving ELLs are no exception. The teachers in the ESL program emphasize reading in both the student's native language and English. Additionally, the standards for listening, speaking, reading and writing are met through a combination of instruction being delivered by following the TBE model for beginner ESL classes. Bilingual classes use the following Spanish-English TBE model: 60-40 for the beginning of the school year; 50- 50 in the middle of the school year; 75-25 at the end of the school year. As the students acquire more English, the ratio shifts to reflect their language acquisition. In addition, during independent reading, teachers conference with ELLs. They also conference with lower-performing ELLs in other content classes. Our school also promotes writing a five-paragraph essay in all content areas. Programs like System 44, Milestones and Rosetta Stone are used during AIS (Academic Intervention Services), Holiday and Saturday Academy. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year, ELLs use System 44 and/or Rosetta Stone during Saturday and Holiday Academy. This program is continuing in its second year, with the intention of strengthen ELLs’ phonics skills. In addition, the ELA and ESL teachers are receiving subscriptions to Reading A-Z this year in order to facilitate differentiation in reading. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The school follows the transitional model (TBE) and freestanding ENL program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All communication about school programs is translated into Spanish. In addition, ELLs are given preference for admission into both Saturday Academy and after-school intervention programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 95  We have three levels of Milestones textbooks and workbooks available to our ENL and TBE classes. All classes utilize a variety of instructional materials and technology to access ELLs. These include classroom libraries, powerpoints, smartboards, laptops, traditional glossaries, dictionaries, bilingual dictionaries, ipads with ELL applications, Reading A-Z, and projectors. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The TBE model utilizes Google translate, and Spanish-language texts to support native language learning. Additionally, student work produced in Spanish is occasionally accepted in various content area classes. The ESL model also utilizes Google translate to assist when necessary. Students are also encouraged to read content-relevant texts in their native language whenever possible and productive. 7th and 8th grade TBE classes have a Spanish-speaking para-professional due to the fact to Ms. Simson and Ms. Kirkish (8th grade ESL) and Ms. Mearse and Ms. Simson (7th grade ENL) do not speak Spanish. The TBE classes also receive Native Language Arts class daily. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services support and correspond to ELLs’ grade-level classes. Students who have been held back are not placed according to their age. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We have three levels of Milestones textbooks and workbooks available to our ESL and TBE classes. All classes utilize a variety of instructional materials and technology to access ELLs. These include classroom libraries, powerpoints, smartboards, laptops, traditional glossaries, dictionaries, bilingual dictionaries, ipads with ELL applications, Reading A-Z, and projectors. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We currently have a new student orientation that is inclusive of all students. This year we had a parent welcome open-house in September that is offered in English and Spanish. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The only language elective offered is Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The school-based professional development team is comprised of the principal and assistant principals. Both the principal and assistant principals are charged with planning and structuring meaningful professional development that meets the needs of our faculty in the bilingual and ENL department, as well as all subject area teachers who are responsible for delivering instruction to ELL students. All pedagogues are scheduled for mandatory team planning periods every other day. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 96  As the recipients of a CUNY-NYSIEB grant, we also hosted two professional development sessions on trans-languaging this past fall for all interested staff. Teachers of ELLs are offered professional development on site and a variety of PDs outside of school. Some of the most recent professional development that were conducted in our schools are Understanding the Common Core Standards, Thinking Maps, Building Rigor in your Lessons, etc. Teachers also attend professional developments outside of school, such as Trans-languaging and The Office of ELLs, offered by CUNY and Fordham University. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The principal sends guidance counselors, teachers and the parent coordinator to the elementary school recruitment fairs. This open house allows for Grade 5 students transitioning from elementary to middle school, meet with key staff members to hear and see (via electronic slide shows) course offeriings at IS 339. Assemblies are held for parents throughout the year, and guidance counselors are available to assist students in their transition. Teachers and other staff who speak students’ native languages provide translation between students, teachers and parents. Our bilingual guidance staff arranges visits from high schools which specialize in new immigrants. During these visits, students experience a short presentation about the prospective high school. All such presentations are enhanced by the presence of a Spanish-language translator. In addition, the 8th grade ENL teacher conferences with students during lunch and after-school to ensure ELLs understand how to read the high school books. These practices allow students to make an informed decision and select their best possible high school. Professional Developments contributing toward the minimum 50% of ELL training for all staff include topics such as diagnosing student needs by using ATS, gathering year-end data to assess growth of ELL students,Language acquisition, trans-languaging, and analyzing and interpreting year-end data to track growth of ELL students for the upcoming year. Other appropriate PDs will be selected at the principal and assistant principals’ discretion. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR-Part 80 must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 1. I.S 339 has a PA (Parent Association) which parents are notified about through a bilingual flyer sent home from school. The Bilingual Information and Orientation Session involves and informs parents of all Bilingual/ELL programs available at our school site as well as the range of choices provided by the Department of Education. Calendars and other flyers are printed and given out at school for parents to learn about news. Flyers are offered in both English and Spanish. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 97  The parent coordinator distributes surveys, parent-teacher conferences alert teachers of parents’ needs, and the guidance counselors reaches out to our parents. We also address individual parents’ concerns. C.I.S. 339 also reviews the previous year’s school environment survey to identify parent needs or concerns. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 98 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Kim S. Outerbridge, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 99  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: IS 339 School DBN: 09X339 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ms. Kim Outerbridge Title Principal Ms. Celeste Ross-Barry Assistant Principal Mr. Ramon Echevarria Parent Coordinator Ms. Meredith Simson/ENL ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Latoya Biggs Parent Mr. Jose Betancourt/SS Teacher/Subject Area Mr. Roberto Crespo/NLA Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Mr. Ramon Nunez School Counselor Ms. Leticia Rodriguez-Rosario Sabrina Cruz-ELL compliance sp Ms. Rizvi- school psych. Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Related-Service Provider Ms. Angela Kirkish Other ENL Teacher Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 100  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 09X339 School Name: IS 339 Superintendent: Ms.L. Rodriguez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (Meredith Meredith Ramon xxx Simson Simson ENL Teacher ENL Teacher Echavarria Parent Coordinator xxx ccxcc Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Data gathered through ATS as well as Parent Surveys given to incoming registrants indicates that I.S. 339 community comprises three distinct language groups: English, Spanish, and French. Though several African languages are indicated as student’s home language, their parents 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 101  are able to communicate orally and through writing in either English or French. Translation services therefore are needed for Spanish and French speakers. We have on staff at I.S. 339 bi-lingual staff representative of the full spectrum of our student and parent populations available and qualified to translate all written communication (memo’s, notes home to parents, etc...) as well as to serve as oral interpreters when the need arises. Furthermore, all official Department of Education written communications are offered in many different languages. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral As indicated above, I.S. 339 has both written and oral translation needs in the following languages: Spanish and French. Findings will be discussed in SLT meetings, Parent Association meetings and Teacher meetings. These findings will be reported to the school community throughout letters, flyers and meetings will the stakeholders throughout the year. xxx xxx xxxx Yes 100% Yes 100% xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxxx xxxx xxx 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. xxx Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 102  1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Ongoing All letters to parents/guardians which are printed directly from ATS should automatically be printed in the home language. For example: Promotion in doubt letters-June promotional letters as well as summer school letters. How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Letters are translated in house by the pupil accounting secretary. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-Teacher Conference - Nov. 29, 2017, March 6, 2018. Curriculum Nights - Sept. 26, 2017, May 9, 2018 Parent-Teacher Conference - Nov. 29, 2017, March 6, 2018. Curriculum Nights - Sept. 26, 2017, May 9, 2018 interpretation service(s)? Staff are available ELL Parent Meeting October 2017 Internal Staff Bronx Works event Family Day January 2018 December 2017 June 2018 CBO CSD will provide interpreters Internal Staff will provide interprepretations as needed 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Translators are available within the school community. Staff is always available to support this effort. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 103  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During a Monday PD experience all staff will be given this information. We will revisit the goals as necessary. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) LAC and the parent coordinator will ensure that all notifications/posters are clearly posted both in the main office and the main entrance of the school building. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent survey/ PA meetings as well as SLT meetings. Parent notifications by means of notices that are back packed with students. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 104 
