 10X391 School Name: THE ANGELO PATRI MIDDLE SCHOOL Principal: GISELLE FORTICHE 2018-19 RSCEP-R 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Angelo Patri School 321000010391 6-8 School Number (DBN): 10X391 2225 Webster Avenue, Bronx, NY, 10457 718-584-0980 718-584-1358 Phone Number: Giselle Fortiche Fax: gfortic@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: Replications Giselle Fortiche Nancy Cabrera DermottMyrie ShaquanaEvans Giselle Fortiche/DermottMyrie(Co-Chairpersons) SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): IselaToledo N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 10 Maribel Hulla Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza, Room 836, Bronx, NY 10458 Superintendent’s Office Address: MHulla@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 3  FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue Bronx, New York 10462/One Fordham Plaza Bronx, New York 10458 Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 718-828-7776/718-741-8895 718-828-6280 2018-19 RSCEP-R 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with 2018-19 RSCEP-R 5  the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development 2018-19 RSCEP-R 6  The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure 2018-19 RSCEP-R 7  how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 8   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group Giselle Fortiche DermottMyrie ShaquanaEvans MaritzaVelez JossetGand Nancy Cabrera Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 10 Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group Amanda De La Cruz MelissaFeliciano ShantayBryan Elizabeth Christian Joanna Malatino NieshaCollins HeatherRohan Nicole R. Theo, Director of School Renewal Don /CBORepresentative Represented CBO Representative, if applicable/ Parent Parent Parent Staff Staff Staff Staff Member/ Other Contributor Other Contributor Other Contributor 2018-19 RSCEP-R 11  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. 1. The Angelo Patri School is a 6-8 grade middle school located in the Fordham section of the Bronx. We have 544 students; 82% qualify for Title 1 funding; 36% are English Language Learners (ELLs), 28% are Special Needs, and 35% are General Education. Each grade has at least one inclusion class, one self-contained class, one monolingual class and, one bilingual class. Mission: Provide a safe, nurturing, educational community that develops the whole child through implementation of rigorous, CCLS aligned instruction as well as systems and structures that support the social and emotional needs of adolescents. Vision: Creating respectful, accountable, mature, and successful global citizens who are college and career ready Our school has established several essential partnerships. Among them are:  Replications  Children's Village  Broadway, Junior  DreamYard  Educational Alchemy We will begin (or expand) implementation of the following school improvement strategies during this school year: ● All students will be programmed for morning advisory to support academic and social-emotional well-being ● Expansion of the community school offerings / advertising in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school ● Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure continued implementation of curriculum and instruction of aligned Common Core State Standards (CCLS) units and to support staff in effectively responding to students multi-entry point needs both academic and social-emotionally ● Focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement and attendance to student events. As per our May 2018 Quality Review, our areas of strength were: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 12  4.1, Observe teachers using the Danielson Framework for Teaching along with the analysis of learning outcomes to elevate school-wide instructional practices and implement strategies that promote professional growth and reflection All other components with the exception of 1.2 and 2.2 were Proficient As per our May 2018 Quality Review, our areas of growth are: 1.2, Develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching4, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products 2.2, Align assessments to curricula, use on-going assessment and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels 2018-19 RSCEP-R 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X391 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 530 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 86 86 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 42 39 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 90.2% % Reduced Lunch 36.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 74.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.1 6% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 16.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups LEP Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 44 44 8 91.1% 0.4% 27.0% 21.9% 1.5% 0.9% 6 42% 6.9 7.8% 24% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-R 14  2018-19 RSCEP-R 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Data was collected from the 2018 Quality Review and 2017-2018 School Quality Guide. We also utilized NYSED and NYCDOE assessment data, NYSESLAT data including the iReady and Ready NY assessments which were utilized for baseline/benchmark assessments and indicated student growth aligned with the CCLS. As a result of reviewing the data, we identified the following: Strengths: Indicator 1.1 - Rigorous, engaging and coherent curricula aligned to the CCLS. The curriculum in all content areas is aligned to CCLS ELA - Expeditionary Learning and TC Writing Math - Key Elements of Mathematics Social Studies - Passport for Learning Science - PBIS Science 2018-19 RSCEP-R 16  Curriculum maps were teacher generated and modified to address the needs of students, including SWDs and ENL. Priority Needs:  Incorporate rigorous habits and high order skills to provide students daily with multiple entry points for "minds on" engagement for all students, including ENL and SWDs  High levels of student thinking and participation that culminate in meaningful work products   Common assessment analysis that drives curricular and instructional adjustments Incorporate checks for understanding, and student self-assessment that lead to effective lesson adjustments While the school has implemented rigorous curricula aligned to the CCLS, rigorous instruction and assessment analysis/utilization to drive instruction, is inconsistent across all grades and content areas Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? The Angelo Patri School's Instructional Focus was co-created with teachers/staff using assessment, ADVANCE, and Framework Survey data: If teachers intentionally plan and execute "minds on" engagement, then students will find relevance and meaning in their work, leading to increased achievement across all grades and content areas. In order to promote the instructional focus consistently across classrooms,  The Instructional Focus is posted predominately in the main office as well as in every classroom as a reminder of the school policies that all members of our school community are informed of. We have discussed what our instructional focus “looks like”in action and practice through our School wide Instructional Expectations which is part of the staff handbook that is referenced and reviewed on a regular basis over the year.  During Classroom Observations, Administrators will provide teachers with actionable feedback and next steps that reflect our instructional focus.  We have teacher center coaches,and our Peer Collaborative Teacher use our instructional focus as a lens for structured inter-visitations; feedback and next steps provided also align with these expectations.  We are conducting instructional and environmental Learning Walks: School leaders, coaches, and Instructional Leads conduct classroom walkthroughs, visiting 6-8 classes, and align their observations and holistic feedback and next steps to our instructional focus.  Our teacher teams are developing/implementing an assessment landscape in which ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science are being assessed using baseline/benchmark assessments aligned to the CCLS which they will use to conduct data chats and create instructional adjustments  As part of our lesson planning work to address the needs from our Quality review, teachers are expected to embed checks for understanding strategies as part of our professional development cycle What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? Our school’s curriculum focus is to establish a common language and set of expectations around instructional practices that provide a consistency for the curricula across classrooms so that content can be accessible for all learners. Our vision is to implement a CCLS-aligned curricula that engages students in Instruction. This instruction will be delivered using the workshop model and supplemented with strategic, evidence-based grouping structures, to provide ample opportunities for students to engage with key concepts and turning points through rich text-based discussions and frequent writing tasks. We Keep at the heart the need for immersing students in reading, writing, problem solving, vigorous discussion, the arts, athletics and acts of intellectual creation to build college ready students. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 17  Additionally, we are working with representatives from Teach to ONE New Classrooms Math Program to infuse in our Math curriculum high-quality, engaging, differentiated rigorous tasks that are relevant to our student population understanding and needs. What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? This year we will be including in the Extended Learning Hour advisory, art classes and enrichment courses focused on developing the whole child. The program will include Second Step - an advisory program that focuses on skills and habits to develop organizational skills and positive habits of mind as part of the morning programming and more academic support for literacy. Which will help students in establishing relationships built on trust and authentic caring, provide an increased support for new students and their families and integrate a college level perspective of planning and organization to encourage our programmatic plan to offer higher level courses to encourage students to earn credits that will put them on the path to earn college credits in High school. What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? We believe that students learn by doing. Instruction will be delivered using a research-based method that includes the workshop model, an inquiry based lesson or a problem-based lesson. How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? Teachers must plan for multiple entry points on their lesson plans and implement through a tiered system of addressing student needs through different modalities to get them to the same learning objective. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? Comprehensive assessment strategies include benchmarks/baselines, diagnostic, formative and summative assessments. These assessments will support teachers in their curriculum planning and design, groupings to maximize student learning and support students in taking ownership in their learning by directly completing student reflections, conference with teachers around goals and tracking mastery of standards. Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) I-Ready ELA and Math Diagnostic/Benchmark/Predictive 6-8 MyOn Formative/Benchmark 6-8 Quarterly Subject Area Assessments (ELA, math, science, social studies) Teachers and school leaders will regularly review student use and diagnostic data for I-Ready Math and ELA and progress data for MyOn to monitor the impact of programs on student achievement and to predict student success on State ELA and math exams in order to address gaps in instruction. Teachers and school leaders will review student success on quarterly assessments in order to identify and address gaps in instruction and plan interventions. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 18  Ready NY Paper and Pencil Diagnostic 6-8 Imagine Learning Diagnostic/Formative 6-8 Teachers and school leaders will analyze student results on baseline and mid-year assessments in order to identify key power standards for each grade level and to provide targeted supports and track student progress towards grade level standards. Teachers and school leaders will regularly review student use and diagnostic and progress data for first year ENL students to monitor the impact of programs on student achievement Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, there will be an increase in average student proficiency rates so as to meet the metric targets of 2.32 on the state ELA exams and 2.13 on the math state exams as a result of teachers collaborating and monitoring assessments and incorporating student centered practices to daily lessons to enhance instructional practices and curricula. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? Framework: Rigorous Instruction, 3.00 to 3.30 Performance Index on State ELA Exam, 55 to 77 Average Math Proficiency Rating, 2.12-2.16 Average ELA Proficiency Rating, 2.13 to 2.32 N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-R 19  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Teacher teams will develop a comprehensive assessment calendar indicating progress monitoring system, including baseline and benchmark assessments and quarterly unit assessments Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Teachers/ ILT September 2018 – June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) AP (6-8 ELA, 6-8 ENL) AP (6-8 Social Studies, 6-8 Math) Framework: Rigorous Instruction as per academic calendar AP (6-8 Science, 6-8 Specials) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Calendar must be complete by September 28, 2018 indicating baselines, benchmark and quarterly unit assessments Teachers All teachers will utilize a variety of formative assessments and strategies for checking student understanding during classroom instruction daily ELA/Math Proficiency State ELA Performance Index Framework: Rigorous Instruction ELA/Math Proficiency State ELA Performance Index September 2018-June 2019 FSC Instructional Support, Consultant support (provide teachers with a toolbox/models of how to assess during instruction), Principal Classroom observations and Instructional Learning Walks Teachers will adapt/modify their curriculum programs Teachers September 2018-June 2019 FSC Instructional Support/UFT Support 2018-19 RSCEP-R 20  across all grades/content areas in order to target student needs, including SWDs and ENLs with support through professional learning and staff development Framework: Rigorous Instruction ELA Proficiency Math Proficiency ELA State Performance Observations, Instructional Learning Walks, curriculum unit maps, teacher meeting minutes Consultants (support teachers and teacher leaders with curriculum implementation and modifcation represented by curriculum maps and pacing guides) Monitor completion of the assessment calendar, formative assessment implementation, curriculum modification and effective pedagogy using an observation/feedback cycle aligned with NYCDOE ADVANCE system and benchmarks Administrative Team Framework: Rigorous Instruction September 2018-June 2019 Administrative Team AP (6th Grade, 6-8 ELA/ENL ) AP (7th Grade, 6-8 Social Studies/Math) AP (8th grade, 6-8 Science/Specials) Principal Fortiche (6-8 grades/content areas) Teacher Leaders, FSC instructional support/Consultants Ongoing cycles throughout the school year All faculty (teachers and APs) will be involved in inquiry cycles around culturally responsive learning, ensuring to address the needs of all students, including SWDs and ENLs All Faculty (teachers and APs) Framework: Rigorous Instruction Framework: Collaborative Teachers 4b – Parent and Family Engagement Weekly Administrative cabinet meeting review of observation completion Weekly Agenda item on ILT for review of team progress on curriculum maps/modifications and formative assessment implementation Inquiry Cycle documentation, reports to ILT, classroom observations How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 21  Parent Coordinator and key instructional personnel will be responsible for Family Learning Activities around rigorous instruction and the standards. Family workshops will include activities families can do together at home with their children from the workshops. Content area teachers and Parent Coordinator will plan workshops together and present together. The first introductory workshop will be held in September during our Welcome Back to School meeting. We will then have one meeting each quarter to address these topics as well as additional topics throughout the 2018-2019 school year. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. Human Resources: Teachers, Instructional Lead Teachers, Administrative Team, Consultants for professional development, Community School Coordinator and other staff from Replications that will support us with systems to monitor the impact of our work. Instructional Resources: Leveled Libraries, Technology (Smart Board, Document Cameras, I- Pads, Computers Carts, Headphones, etc.), Reading Assessments, Professional books, ASCD and other professional memberships, registration for institutes, training and per session rates, Schedule adjustments: Adjustment of schedule to provide greater opportunities for teachers to unpack and plan units of study in collaborative vertical and horizontal teams; for teachers to plan and modify assessments; for teachers to participate in Inter-visitations and lesson studies, time for feedback; and release time for teachers to participate in Professional Development provided by outside sources. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School X Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. February 2019 - I-Ready Benchmarks Students will demonstrate growth of at least one year in both ELA and Math on the I-Ready Benchmarks demonstrating progress towards the Renewal Benchmarks of 2.16 in Math and 2.32 in ELA. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 22  iReady ELA , iReady Math Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? As per the 2017-18 School Quality Guide, and Quality review feedback, we found that the school was proficient in 1.4, yet our school wide Skedula reports and OORS reports show an increase in the number of incidents in the school. Our school survey states as strengths we have: 82%of students say that they feel safe in their classes. (Q7d) 71% of students feel safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms, and cafeteria. (Q7c) Our weaknesses are: 30% of our students state that students pay attention when they are supposed to 51% of our students state that most students follow the rules in class 30% of our students state that most students behave well even when the teacher isn’t watching 28% of teachers say that students listen carefully when the teacher gives directions. (Q20b) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 24  40% of teachers say that students follow the rules in class. (Q20d) 20% of teachers say that students behave well in class even when the teacher isn't watching. (Q20i As a result, teachers and staff will work together to develop a common understanding of creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision through advisory, the continuation of our PBIS Team, PPT and Restore , Rejuvenate and Reflect Initiative. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? We envision a comprehensive set of systems and supports that proactively address issues and factors that compromise our ability to grow, learn, and perform and that reinforce positive behavior. Our mission is for school stakeholders to view the school as a safe, nurturing and supportive educational community that develops the whole child through implementation of rigorous CCLS aligned instruction as well as systems and structures that support and document the social and emotional needs of adolescents. Each member of our school community is an essential member and partner in creating a safe and supportive environment. In addition to our lead CBOs, our additional CBOs provide innovative ways to address the social emotional needs of the school community. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner Replications Children's Village CBO Focus Replications will work with the TAPS team on Restorative Justice and Restorative Circles Work. They will also lead the work related to improving student attendance and family engagement initiatives. Children's Village will lead the work in the after-school program, providing academic and socialization supports. Children's Village will also spearhead the school's community service activities. How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families?  Replications will host one extra curricular event per quarter for families in which they will support attendance.  During School grade level community meeting, Replications will present attendance certificates. Monthly  Children's Village (after school) will have scheduled quarterly events for families to have parents attend sessions or other events (ie. trips, shows)  CBOs as part of the family engagement team will work with the TAPS staff to organize family trips to celebrate student accomplishments, both for academics and social emotional Part 3 – Annual Goal 2018-19 RSCEP-R 25  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, through the incorporating of school-wide behavioral intervention practices there will be an overall decrease of at least 20% in level 1-5 incidents as evidenced by OORS reports as compared to the number of level 4-5 incidents as measured by the 2017-2018 OORS reports. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve School struggles to decrease the number of level 4-5 incidents and suspensions. Suspensions have increased from previous years. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 26  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. PBIS team will meet minimum of bi-weekly to discuss and progress monitor student incidents. PBIS team will implement positive incentive program and act as the hub for the school's Restorative Justice initiative. PBIS team will monitor Restorative Circle activity and review data to assess effectiveness. Team will communicate weekly with school through TAPS updates. PBIS team will host staff wide professional learning on the Climate and Culture plan implementation and ensure communication with faculty. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Faculty Attendance, OORS data, Collaborative Teachers September 2018-June 2019 ORS/Skedula Reporting. Weekly updates to ILT and ADM Cabinet. PBIS Team meeting notes. PBIS Team: Supv-AP Dean UFT Chairperson or proxy Guidance Counselor(s) Teacher Rep CBO Rep School Aide Rep Family Worker Rep Restorative Justice Implementation Students and Staff Attendance, OORS Data Students Attendance, OORS Data ELT Morning Advisory. Teachers will implement advisory program during morning ELT PBIS Team (AP , supv), Replications Morning ELT Supv-P September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Decrease in OORS reports of level 4-5 incidents Advisory Attendance. Decrease in OORS reports of level 4-5 incidents Classroom Management and Students/ Faculty Attendance, OORS Data, Rigorous Instruction, September 2018-June 2019  FSC Director of Student Services  Consultant  Youth Development Professional 2018-19 RSCEP-R 27  Climate and Culture Support for faculty ELA/Math proficiency rating, Collaborative Teachers  Dean learning Community group minutes  Reduction in OORS reports of level 4-5 incidents Increase in student survey  Guidance Team will plan/implement grade specific events/ initiatives for social emotional learning and support Students Attendance, OORS Data September 2018-June 2019 AP , supv Guidance Counselor Team Lead Decrease in OORS reports of level 4-5 incidents 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The parents on the SLT as representatives of the PA will include the following supports: The PA will work with parent coordinator to create a volunteer groups for attendance calls and outreach as well as joining the family workers on home visits so that parent can feel comfort with having a parent peer to reach out to. The formation of a PA parent group for attendance support group (task force) for tardiness and motivating students for success. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : Teachers, Administrators, guidance counselors and social workers, Consultants for PD, Social-emotional and Extended Learning Time partners, Lead students Instructional Resources : Books, supplies, technology, Incentives for PBIS Store Schedule Adjustments : Time for PPT, PBIS and SIT teams to meet; Time students government to meet; time for extracurricular activities 2018-19 RSCEP-R 28  Other: Training and per session rates, workshops for parents, celebration fees, stipends for trips Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, in a month to month comparison from previous year to current year to see a decrease incidents for levels 4 and 5 and monitoring. We will look at percentages of implementation of programs by staff with the goal of 45% completion. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. New Visions Data Sorter and Heat Map Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed x x X 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Data was collected from the 2017-18 Quality Review Report, State and City Assessment data, MS Quality guide, and school self – assessment with input from the SLT team, Teachers, and the administrative team. As a result of reviewing the data, we identified the following strengths and priority needs: Strengths This past year, we have made progress in bringing teachers together in grade and subject teams to work towards ensuring that instructional practices and strategies are organized around students’ needs. Teachers are provided with opportunities to collaborate and participate in professional learning experiences on a weekly basis. · During weekly common planning time, teachers use Meeting Wise structures and protocols to organize and structure meetings to look at multiple sources of data, discuss instructional strategies and share best practices, and plan interventions. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 30  · The professional development team (Administrators and Instructional Leads) plan professional development activities to develop teachers’ instructional practice using the Danielson Framework and other school instructional initiatives as a guideline for teacher improvement; Priority needs to be addressed The school leaders should utilize weekly PD opportunities for all teachers, co-teachers, and teaching assistants to develop staff capacity to: · Use formative assessments to consistently provide multiple entry points into the curricula, student work products and discussion in order to meet the needs of all students, specifically ELLs and SWDs. · Collaboratively develop a bank of resources , tools and protocols for all teachers -Develop common checks for understanding and a common language and structure for feedback to accelerate student achievement. - Instructional Leads and/or subject APs facilitate sessions to collaborate to plan lessons, create rubrics, use the modified Learning From Student Work protocol to look at student’s work, and adjust lessons -Engage in vertical and horizontal collaborative inquiry teams to improve instruction by analyzing data, implementing new strategies and assessing the impact of strategies. In addition, the school needs to: · Strengthen the systems and structures for teachers to collaborate in vertical and horizontal teams so teachers can implement a minimum of 2 cycles of the Data Wise inquiry process and develop their own professional learning plan. and · Strengthen the systems and structures to monitor the impact of professional learning and collaborative inquiry on daily classroom instruction using the Data Wise Improvement Process. · Continued professional development for teachers with a focus on analyzing data to support planning rigorous and coherent instruction, improving pedagogy and analyzing data to set goals and address the needs of individuals and groups of students. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? A collaborative team is a group of individuals who share common beliefs and work towards common goals. Collaborative team members spend time discussing what they hope to accomplish as a team and set team and individual goals for reaching that vision during common planning time, vertical and horizontal team meetings, professional development opportunities, and voluntary planning meetings. Collaborative teams sit in a circle to encourage face-to-face-interactions with lead teachers and their respective teams coalesce and take ownership of their roles/parts in the school’s strategic planning and decision-making. Collaborative team members use 2018-19 RSCEP-R 31  collaborative skills to review data, share their noticings and wonderings and presente suggested next steps. Teacher teams will utilize the Data Wise Improvement Process to make sense of data and ultimately use it to drive improvement. Team members encourage each other to interact and to take part in group problem solving and decision-making activities, make decisions by consensus, poll each other for understanding of issues or ideas, and criticize ideas, but not each other. They focus time and energy on building positive relationships among team members. Next year, we look to continue this work by providing more time for teams to collaborate and strengthening meeting protocols to better adjust our curriculum and instruction to target individual students. The school is organized into Grade Level Teams, smaller learning communities, Horizontal grade level teams and vertical content teams....which allows our staff to be better informed around the academic and social emotional needs of the students within these smaller communities, as well as to collaborate to reinforce our RAMS values and the PBIS framework which are systems in place to ensure a safe learning environment for all. How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? The instructional cabinet will serve as a model of collaboration to drive school improvement. The team will participate in the Data Wise Improvement Process professional learning to improve the data study and analysis cycle. This will support our efforts to build an evidence-based culture of collaborative inquiry to make sense of data and use it to make key decisions. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Teachers will meet during weekly content-based planning teams to analyze multiple sources of data, discuss instructional strategies and share best practices, plan interventions and revise unit plans. This collaborative inquiry will lead to an improvement in teacher planning and pedagogy and ultimately, improved student outcomes. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? In addition to horizontal teams, teachers will meet in vertical teams. These i teams will also engage in the collaborative inquiry cycle of analyzing data and sharing instructional strategies and best practices across content areas. As a result, there will be an alignment of instruction across disciplines. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Data Reviewed Intent ADVANCE observation data School leaders will regularly review data for Danielson components 1a, 1e, 3c and 3d to monitor the impact of collaborative inquiry cycles on teacher practice. Quarterly/Benchmark Assessment Data Teachers and school leaders will regularly review assessment data to monitor the impact of collaborative inquiry cycles on student achievement. Student Work Products (Performance Tasks) Teachers and school leaders will regularly review student work products to monitor the impact of collaborative inquiry on student achievement. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 32  Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, teachers will adopt collaborative learning practices to design work for students that exhibits high engagement and multiple entry points daily as seen through ADVANCE observations and related learning walks leading to an increase in the average math proficiency rating between 2.12 and 2.16 and average ELA proficiency rating between 2.13 and 2.32 as seen on the NYSED ELA/Math assessments and NYCDOE social studies and science performance tasks. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Framework: Collaborative Teachers Framework: Rigorous Instruction 2018-19 RSCEP-R 33  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Provide support (PDs/educational tools, etc), and resources for multiple entries that are researched best practices in the use of differentiation, creation of actionable and concrete next steps through professional learning opportunities. Teachers will use the school's curriculum to plan meaningful performance tasks that are student centered and include student work celebrations per unit Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Teachers Framework: Rigorous Instruction September 2018-February 2019 FSC support Math consultant Administrative team AP -ELA/ENL AP Connolly-Math/SS AP -Science/Specials increase in lessons and lesson plans with evidence of multiple entry points and formative assessments to create actionable next steps from september to January and again in March Students and Teachers Framework: Rigorous Instruction September 2018-June 2018 Teacher Teams  Curriculum and AP -ELA/ENL AP Math/SS AP -Science/Specials Assessment Maps in every content area completed by end of September and updated as needed  Every map must include at least 1 student performance task/assessment per unit Students and Teachers By June 2019, all students will have at least 1 "menu" item opportunity per subject area in which they are able 2018-19 RSCEP-R 34 Framework: Rigorous Instruction September 2018 – June 2019 Teacher Teams  Menu Item AP -ELA/ENL Performance Tasks delineated on respective curriculum maps  to choose a real world performance task to demonstrate their standards/content mastery Teacher teams will engage in inquiry weekly around key instructional initiatives/targets based on QR feedback, School Quality Guide, student achievement data and ADVANCE observation information Teacher teams will develop/implement grade level assessment PLCs in which they will review student work to assess student learning and weaknesses to modify instruction accordingly AP - Math/SS AP -Science/Specials  Student Work Celebrations Students   All teachers/ teacher teams Framework: collaborative teachers Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teacher Teams  AP -ELA/ENL  AP -Math/SS  AP -Science/Specials  Chart progress through Inquiry minutes template and completion of templates Students and Teachers Framework: Rigorous Instruction September 2018- June 2019 Grade Level Teams  Data Analysis  6th grade - AP  7th Grade-AP  8th Grade-AP Chart o Chart progress through Grade Team minutes template 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Building one-to-one relationships between families and educators that are linked to student classroom learning: Taking time to have conversations and reach agreement on how best to collaborate in order to improve student achievement.USing parent engagement time content area teacher will create a discussion protocol to talk about individual students strengths and how to use them to promote growth which will be logged in the students daily planners/agendas. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 35  Teachers, Instructional Lead Teachers, Administrative Team, Consultants for professional development, Community School Coordinator and other staff from Replications /Children’s Village that will support us with systems to monitor the impact of teacher’s collaboration on student’s achievement. Instructional Resources: Professional Libraries, technology, general supplies Schedule adjustments: Adjustment of schedule to provide opportunities for teachers to plan and modify lessons in collaborative vertical and horizontal teams; for teachers to plan and modify assessments; for teachers to participate in Inter-visitations and time for feedback ; and release time for teachers to participate in Professional Development provided by outside sources. Other: ASCD and other professional memberships, registration for institutes, training and per session rates. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, teachers would have received PD on engagement and in walkthrough there will be an improvement in student intellectual engagement and teacher practice in ADVANCE ratings 1e, 3b, 3c, 3d and 4e. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Framework - teacher observations informal walk through data Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Data was collected from the, 2017-18 Quality Review Report, State and preliminary City Assessment data, MS Quality Guide, and school self – assessment with input from the SLT /CET teams, Lead Teachers, teacher teams and the administrative team. As a result of reviewing the data, we identified the following strengths and priority needs: Strengths According to the 2017-18 Quality Review :   Administration provided staff with consistent messages regarding high expectations through the weekly memos, bulletins, a staff handbook, and observational feedback. Administration delineated school goals, action plans, and next steps during the opening day professional learning session, setting the tone for the year. Staff is empowered to make decisions through distributed leadership positions. Such positions include, but are not limited to, grade and subject leads, the instructional cabinet, common planning teams, attendance team, model inquiry team, administrative inquiry team, extended leadership inquiry team, budget committee, and supportive environment team. This variety positions empowers staff to be engaged in leadership positions focused on both academics and social emotional supports. Lead teachers are not only part of the instructional leads team, but they also form the professional learning team whereby teachers create and present professional learning to their peers, conduct intervisitations, and share best practices. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 37  The principal has orchestrated ongoing events and has created multiple opportunities to partner with and engage families in learning. She has worked with her staff to ensure students are well prepared and can lead a conversation about the academic progress and next steps during Student Led Conferences. To address the gaps in literacy and math, we will continue to provide students with extended learning time opportunities. We also will have a Saturday Academy that targets the development of literacy skills and math skills to address intervention needs and Saturday enrichment academy to push gains math and literacy skills for all other students. Resources have been allocated for the implementation of I- Ready Math, and I- Ready ELA, the 100 Book Challenge, a school wide RTI program to address students’ reading deficiencies; to purchase Imagine Learning, a web-based program to address the development of language skills for ELLs and SWDs; and for teacher teams to collaborate in planning and aligning instruction in all content areas to address the needs of our community. Regularly scheduled budget meetings are held to ascertain how funding is being allocated to address initiatives that focus on our school needs. Priority needs to be addressed  To increase retention we need to develop a New Teacher cohort group that is supported by the Instructional Leads and other outside support services as well as provide professional development targeted to the teachers with more than 5 years as they push through instructional elements in need of support. As indicated in the school’s quality snapshot: The school leader should prioritize specific goals to increase student growth in English language arts (ELA) and math and to improve school wide instructional practices. The school leader should use these to: · Continue to frame and coordinate the work and expectations for teacher, APs, consultants, and external partners and create systems of accountability to sustain school improvement; · Collect data from common formative assessments and other data sources to measure the school’s progress toward the goals; · Adjust plans to address the needs of bilingual ,special educations students as well as struggling students; . Expand the work of Inquiry Teams using the Datawise protocol. Additionally, the school need to focus on skills and strategies for all content areas to support our instructional goal of improving literacy in all classrooms. · Continue to put consistent protocols in place to ensure teachers are including strategies for literacy in their planning and instruction to support school goals; · Continue to establish short and long term goals based on data to ensure and drive student achievement; · Expand professional development offerings to reach all teachers; · Continue to hone observation and feedback protocols; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 38  · Continue to build collaborative teacher teams with increased use of protocols; Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? As a school leader I will use a collaborative and inclusive process to articulate and expand the school’s vision and mission. This process begins by creating different teams that includes all school stakeholders to identify how they contribute to our core values and beliefs that all students have Respect Accountability and Maturity so that they can RISE (Respect Integrity Service and Endurance). In our teams the leadership will continue working on building trust, creating systems for improving communication with the staff, and distributing leadership through our Instructional Lead Teachers and our teaching staff in the meetings and professional development opportunities. Through our efforts, we have started to see gains in collaboration and trust among our staff as it relates to working with the extended leadership team. We envision that through our work the school leadership will : ● create accountability systems that inspire risk taking, learning, and personal growth among the staff; (ie- The administrative team will plan cycles of formal and informal observations, school –wide walkthroughs and inter-visitations. The Danielson Framework will be used to provide timely and meaningful feedback. An Organizational Chart which illustrates roles, relationships, and responsibilities Protocols for making and communicating policy decisions and the instructional collaborative expectations ● develop the capacity of the Instructional Leads; ● build trust among school staff, parents and the community. A work plan assigning tasks, action steps, due dates, and guidelines for how people will work together to realize the shared vision On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? The focus for the upcoming school year is to continue a collaborative data-driven decision making culture by engaging in structured professional collaborations using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership with a focus on providing feedback to improve student achievement. What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? We see a community of lifelong learners fully invested in their own growth and in supporting that of their peers and colleagues. As leaders, our mission is to help everyone reach his or her fullest potential by creating and operating systems that allow us to bring the right resources to the right place at the right time. That way, not only will we make 2018-19 RSCEP-R 39 the most of what we have but also help create mindsets that unlock hidden potential throughout the course of lifetimes. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? The administrative team identified teachers with potential leadership qualities. Initially, we identify and/or provide opportunities for these teachers to participate in professional learning opportunities to further develop their leadership skills. These teachers are encouraged to be part of the extended leadership team and to lead smaller teams. As they develop leadership capacity, they are encouraged to apply for leadership roles such as model teacher, peer collaborator, or master teacher How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? We will foster collaborative school governance processes by including CBOs and ensuring equal representation of family and staff members on the School Leadership Team. All members will be provided with access to school data and budgets, and play an active role in the creation and monitoring of the schools RS/CEP goals. With the aim of infusing shared decision making involving both school and community members (staff, families, students, and other community representatives), the leadership is looking to create more equalizing power and sharing leadership opportunities through the development of team members through appropriate reflects and accounts for all stakeholder groups at the SLT meeting and overall staff meetings. How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy Six week cycles Verbal feedback - within 24 hours. Written reports as per ADVANCE policy. To provide accuracy, the leadership team will continue to observe teachers practice in teams of two and engage innorming opportunities to ensure accuracy of ratings. What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Advance evaluation reports Lesson plans/student work Beginning of year meetings, pre- and post-observation conferences, end of year meetings, and Teacher Improvement Plan (TIP) meetings three times per year, personalized professional learning web pages for teachers with individualized resources student work protocol, lesson plan study protocol and template Administration, teachers content area teams and administration 2018-19 RSCEP-R 40  Skedula data School-wide grading Administration, teachers PD on how to use Skedula to meet your students needs - grading and anecdotal - management strategies How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? This year we will continue to include additional five hours of expanded learning time for students. In addition, adjustments will be made to provide time for teams to have multiple opportunities to meet in vertical and horizontal teams, as well as providing per session as needed to promote planning, learning and collaboration to engage in inquiry. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, we will build leadership capacity of teacher leaders, administrative team, and support staff to work in groups to achieve school goals as evidenced by percent of staff that serve as a member on one or more school based teams as evidenced by the Team Organization Sheet (green for leadership role taken), agendas and sign in sheets. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Effective Leadership Framework for Collaborative teachers Framework for Rigorous Instruction 2018-19 RSCEP-R 41  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. School leader will develop clear distributive leadership plan for cabinet and stakeholder teams and communicate the specific roles, responsibilities and monitoring systems to ensure an effective professional/educational environment School leader will communicate vision and share progress check-ins weekly from various stakeholders to ensure that all systems/structures are in place and moving towards school-wide goals School leaders will conduct regular learning walks and utilize instructional data to facilitate differentiated professional learning and monitor progress in school instructional goals using the ADVANCE teacher observation/feedback cycle Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) effective leadership collaborative teachers July 2018-June 2019 Principal Fortiche DSR Theo  PBIS Team  Administrative  team Front Office Team  Replications Team  Guidance Team Faculty effective leadership July 2018-June 2019 Principal Fortiche Teachers and School Leaders rigorous instruction September 2018 – June 2019  Principal Fortiche  AP s  o DSR o Teacher Development and Evaluation Coach  Co-construct Distributive Leadership Plan between July 1 and August 10 to be completed by Aug 24  Weekly cabinet meetings with follow-up debriefs  bi-weekly front office meetings with follow-up debriefs  Teacher Handbook distributed by September 4  Weekly TAPS check-ins September-June (including AP updates)  weekly cabinet meetings  ADVANCE observation reports Learning walk logs and data  2018-19 RSCEP-R 42  Planning for optimal participation through thoughtful scheduling of team meetings, further develop Instructional Leadership Team, which includes members from key stakeholders, to plan and implement instructional decisions across grades/content areas leading to improved attendance, family engagement, teacher collaboration and student achievement School Leaders will receive ongoing leadership development to ensure systems/ structures are in place and moving towards school-wide goals Instructional Leadership Team effective leadership Sept. 2018 – June 2019  Principal Fortiche o DSR collaborative teachers  ILT meetings scheduled for optimal attendance ILT agendas/ minutes ILT team goals for continued improvement school-wide  Evidence of   shared responsibilities ADM team (Principal and APs) effective leadership July 2018-June 2019  New Principal  ADVANCE Support Coaching Fellow (Principal Leadership)  DSR (AP Leadership)  reports show completion targets are met School is on target with expected district/NYCDOE goals 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 43  Parents will be surveyed in October to determine if they want to want to be a part of workshops to promote parent leadership and engagement. Parents interested will receive training from the Renewal School Office on leadership and engagement and then turnkey to other families during Parent Meetings. Increase parent Principal opportunities by hosting parent events such as Principal Chat and Chews monthly during different times in the month based on parent interest. Determine needs of parent leadership and develop a plan with Parent Coordinator, Replications CBO and Principal for specific strategies t o teach families to use at home with their students to strengthen student academics. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Teachers, Instructional Lead Teachers, Administrative Team, Consultants for professional development, Community School Coordinator and other staff from Replications that will support us with systems to monitor the impact of our work. Instructional Resources: Professional Libraries, Technology, general supplies. Schedule adjustments: Time for administrators to plan, look at data participate in school Inter-visitations, and time to participate in Professional Development provided by outside sources. Other: ASCD and other professional memberships, registration for institutes, training and per session rates. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, the school will meet/exceed the ADVANCE benchmark for observation completion to date. Meeting logs will indicate consistent meetings as per schedule with follow-up and action steps addressed. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ADVANCE completion reports 2018-19 RSCEP-R 44  Minutes/meeting logs - Administrative cabinet, ILT, CBO Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 45  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Data was collected from the 2017-2018 Quality Review Report, 2017-2018 school quality Guide , school self-assessment with input from the SLT, and the administrative team As a result of reviewing the data, we identified the following strengths and priority needs: Strengths: The Angelo Patri School has  a Monthly calendar of events for families  Workshops based on the Title 1 needs assessment  Adult education classes (ENL) 3 times a week  Parent access to Skedula and Progress Reports  Campus Food Pantry  Curriculum night, in–house High School Fair, Community Health and Wellness Fair, Community Day Forum, Nutrition Workshops and other school organized events. Student Led Conferences   Monthly PTA meeting with members of the administration  Monthly SLT meetings  Attendance Data shared with famlies 2018-19 RSCEP-R 46  . Priority Needs In an effort to encourage all parents to come to the school for the 2018-2019 academic year, the school leader should: The Angelo Patri Needs: More outside providers for specific training Caregiver’s Circle to support families around parenting and adolescent growth and development Monthly newsletters Develop ways to monitor family workshops and events to determine effectiveness and relevance. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? We see The Angelo Patri School as a true hub of community, as a place where students, teachers, families and community members learn, grow, contribute and celebrate. We see it as a place that honors our rich linguistic and cultural diversity and that brings out the best in all of our community members. Families will be welcomed into the school and made a part of the community using many of the successful approaches listed above. We will continue our Saturday Family Language Academy for parents and their children who are learning English. We also have plans to hold more celebrations and in general make every effort to bring parents into the school to celebrate their children and not only for evaluative purposes. In addition we will look to include parent volunteers in any of the ELT programs that involve parent-student joint learning opportunities or require chaperones such as field trips. Another important change from this past year is the development of a Community School Council-a school governing body comprised of members from the school, community, partner CBOs, school safety team, student body and parents. We will survey the parents to determine what adult education offerings they are interested in and look to provide those courses as much as possible. We are relying on the Community School Director in conjunction with the Parent Coordinator to play an active role in parent involvement and understanding in terms of parent outreach, communication, and programming. Numerous activities, such as Family Night and Father’s Day in the month of September, will be planned to orient, involve, and welcome parents into the school community. Security has been trained in protocols for welcoming parents and directing them to the Community School Office; Teachers will be trained in protocols for contacting parents so that parents know them as allies and partners from the beginning of the school year. We will communicate via newsletters, flyers, phone calls, and email to keep parents 2018-19 RSCEP-R 47  informed of events at the school. We will also use SKEDULA, an online academic reporting system, which parents have access to. Parents will be trained in the use of SKEDULA as well as NYC Accounts to review their child’s data. During parent meetings teachers and staff will review student data with families to inform them of progress and next steps to support their children at home. We will also help our parents understand how they can support their children through workshops, events, and academies. Workshops will be conducted monthly to teach parents helpful tips and ways to support students at home. Some topics will include Family Math, Family Literacy, Understanding the Common Core, Supporting our Readers at home, Types of bullying, Impact of Social Media, Stress Reduction with Yoga, and Mindful Breathing, and the Caregiver's Circle to name a few. Throughout the course of the year, family events and guest speakers will engage the community and families. We will have celebrations around culture, student writing, Reading Milestones, etc. These celebratory events are an opportunity for staff and families to develop relationships. During meetings both formal and informal, families will share information that will better help us support their children both academically and social emotionally. Our parents have shown particular interests in Language Academies, Parenting Skills, and Business Skills. Our CBO in conjunction with the Community School Director and the Parent Coordinator will be instrumental in organizing these academies. Our parents show continued interest in additional workshops around the arts, technology, managing the adolescent which will be addressed through the Caregiver's CIrcle and Family Academies to learn alongside their children. . Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? Families will be welcomed by our Parent Coordinator. Families who come in have an initial conversation with Parent Coordinator and/or Community School Director to assess concerns and/or needs. From there they are directed to the staff members that can support them best. Administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers are given protocols and memos around the expectations of how families are to be welcomed into our school and made a part of the school community. We also have committees and volunteer work that family members can sign up for and be trained in to support the school community. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? Families were identified through Family Engagement Team meetings to participate in the DOE Community School Parent Training program. The team will use strategies presented to increase family involvement around creating leaders among our families. We have our SLT, Community School Team, PTA and FET which all support the development of our families to take leadership roles with the school. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 48  The Angelo Patri Middle School will continue to engage family and community through family engagement workshops, learning workshops for our families, celebrations around student work and productions that our students are a part of. During family conferences, phone conversations, informal and formal meetings, our teachers will continue to have the opportunity to learn about our students. We have the opportunity to learn and grow with our families since our teachers loop with their students creating a tighter connection. What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale Weekly Adult ED Test Readiness Workshops Curricula Workshops Support our families in the development of English language acquisition to help our families help their children. Support families with resources to help students prepare for exams as well as support families in understanding the NYS exams. Inform families of the content for each subject area by grade and inform families of the units of study with the key standards. Support families with resources around the units of study, including our on line resources for reading and math How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Families partner with the school to support student success by: Skedula-our online grading portal Communication via letters, postcards, robocalls Workshops around student learning, social emotional supports Celebrations of students achievement Celebrations around presentations and performances Family partnerships with CBO: Families and CBO'spartner to support student success by: providing mentors for families of students with chronic attendance CSDavailable for family needs Special events planned and organized Eye glasses for students in need 2018-19 RSCEP-R 49  Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Yes, there is a dedicated space for family partnerships with the school and the two CBOs. We have a Family Room and a CSD/Parent Coordinator office. What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? We envision the school organizing a series of institutes based on topics of interest that is collected by the PA and parent input through the use of a survey our families. We will continue to offer Adult ENL classes three times a week in the evening. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? Data and student progress feedback will be available through Skedula, our on line grading system, report cards. formal and informal meetings with teachers, student led conferences and rubrics from performance tasks in all content areas. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, with 100% of the parents getting multiple modes of invitations to participate in school- wide activities,and community outreach resources in the school will increase by 5% parent presence in the building as evidenced by the Monthly Parent Calendar of events, agendas/attendance forms, and parent ilogs. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-R 50 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Parents all grades N/A September 2018-June 2019 Beth Shimkin, Assistant Principal Increase in participation as noted by attendance sheets Leadership Team Increase in the use of Skedula as a tool to support families in tracking academic success Family and Community Ties Team Teachers, CBOs Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. We will strengthen our family and community engagement team, led by our Assistant Principal in charge of Family and Community Ties. All stakeholders will have input in the programs and provide feedback in the efficacy of the programs and their impact on students achievement. The FET will create at least one program per quarter. Parents will be trained in the use of SKEDULA as well as NYC Account to review their child’s data. During parent meetings teachers and staff will review student data with families to inform them of progress and next steps to support their children at home. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 51  To help parents get more involved in their child’s education, a series of workshops will be organized to give parents tools to support their children academically as well as social emotionally. This includes parents of ELL's and SWD's A system will be developed to track parent's participation in school activities. The Guidance Department will host academic and college and career readiness events  Students o Parents rigorous instruction September 2018 - June 2019 supportive environment  AP Metsch  Quarterly Honor o Guidance Dept Roll and Attendance Recognition Celebrations  Hold at least 1 HS choice workshop per grade  Conduct college tours per grade level with 6th/7th/8th grades going to different colleges  Hold at least 1 HS fair to introduce students/parents to district offerings and opportunities  Hold at least 1 Specialized HS info session 2018-19 RSCEP-R 52  The school will host Parent/Community Engagement Events over and above the NYCDOE required parent engagement meetings in order to foster home-school collaboration/ connection Parents/families and students supportive environment September 2018-June 2019  Parent Coordinator Replications Children’s Village Parent Engagement Team (PC, AP, Family Engagement Worker, CSD, Teacher Rep)  Winter/Spring Performance STEAM fair incorporating all content areas   Cultural pot-luck event Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Teachers, Instructional Lead Teachers, Administrative Team, Consultants for workshops, Community School Coordinator and other staff from Replications. Instructional Resources: Books, Technology, Skedula, general supplies. Schedule adjustments: Adjustment of schedule for celebrations events. Other: Fees for museums and similar learning experiences, per session for teachers participating in parental training activities, and resources for celebrations. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 53  By the student led conferences, school will created a small survey which mirrors the Strong Family Community Ties benchmark that assesses family beliefs around expectations for achievement and safety will meet or exceed an average of 2.56 that they will complete and be reviewed by the Family engagement team for planning and reported out to the SLT in January 2019. The number of parents, teachers and students using skedula to communicate (ie- # of parents enrolled, the consistency of teacher data updates, student accessing) Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Instruments of measure to assess progress will include but is not limited to attendance at school wide events, surveys on safety and climate, needs assessments and exit slips at the end of learning activities and institutes. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 54  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. In the 2018-2019 school year, all students will participate in the ELT Second Step Program. The goal of the program is to provide and promote academic, and social-emotional learning experiences for all students, resulting in a sustained attendance rate of 93% and a great Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. The ELT Program will target every student through cycles of academic learning and enrichment programs. This is a mandatory program. Students and parents will be apprised of this extended day opportunity. To actively engage students to participate and attend each session, activities that will address student academic needs and appeal to students’ interests outside of the academics areas such as performing and visual arts, sports, Language Academy, and academic interventions. We will offer multiple opportunities and varied activities during and after the school day. Written notification will be sent to parents, phone calls will be made to homes as well as using the school messenger system. Ongoing communications with students and their families utilizing in school meetings and home visitations will also be implemented. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 55   Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? The school will meet the following SED requirements for the ELT Program in a Renewal School by ensuring that the instructional program is a combination of academic, social emotional and enrichment programming. The academic portion of the program will consist of integrating test preparation strategies and skill development while using current and up-to-date assessment questions for review. In addition, ENL students and students with disabilities will be provided with skills and strategies to improve their overall academic performance and social-emotional growth. Enrichment opportunities such as arts and sports programs will also be provided. We will hold an orientation for incoming students to acclimate them to the school and program. All programs will be provided by licensed and experienced teachers as well as from staff from partner CBO’s who also have a strong interest and desire to teach the content to the students. Professional development will be provided on an ongoing basis and an ELT Team will hold weekly planning and progress monitoring meetings. Regular department and teacher team meetings will also address the needs of the ELT program. Student enrollment and retention efforts will be made for all students. We will take and monitor attendance on a daily basis. Parents will receive written notification and phone calls, as well as messages from the school messenger system, to inform them if their child is absent on an irregular basis. Specific programming for the ELT is as follows: Students will participate in an advisory curriculum Monday through Friday from 7:45 to 8:15 AM. On Wednesday and Thursday afternoon, students will receive 30 minutes of academic instruction in their core content classes, followed by 30 minutes of enrichment programming, which will include arts and sports programs such as music, dance and fitness classes. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 56  1. 2. 3. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? The ELT Program will be implemented and supervised by an Assistant Principal and Replications’ Community School Director. 1. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. Our lead CBO Replications and other partner CBO’s will support the ELT program by providing student programs (arts, music and drama) and social emotional service providers will work with groups and one-on-one for the students who participate. 2. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? The ELT program’s impact on student achievement will be evaluated based on attendance rates, pre/post assessments, course work, pass rates and the Learning Environment Survey. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The ELT Program will begin in September 2018 and will continue through June 2019. ● Determine ELT schedule framework (6/18) ● Assemble CBO team (6/18) ● Determine ELT offerings (6/18-7/19) ● Determine ELT budget (6/18-7/19) ● Make ELT schedule (6/18-8/19) ● Create evaluation protocols (8/19) ● Commence ELT program (9/18) ● Quarterly evaluations and data presentations (11/18, 2/19, 4/19, 6/19) Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 57   NYCDOE certified teachers (20 staff members needed)  CBO staff members (5 staff members 3 enrichment and 2 social emotional supports)  Resources/materials to implement courses (ie. second step curriculum)  Technology resources as needed Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) Tax Levy Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks Morning ELT:  By February 2019, student attendance will be within the Renewal benchmark range of 90.3% to 92.9%  By February 2019, student level of infractions in OORS and Skedula will have decreased by 5%  By February 2019, student scores on curriculum unit quizzes Afternoon ELT:  By end of January, enrichment groups will have produced a product based on their theme and area of expertise to demonstrate engagement  By February 2019, student attendance will be within the Renewal benchmark range of 90.3% to 92.9% Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1. New Visions Attendance Heat Map 2. Qualitative data from enrichment groups products 3. OORS /Skedula data 4. Second Step Curriculum data Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 58  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. Our focus has been on creating a supportive environment through arts enrichment programming and mental health support. Our 2017-18 Quality Review gave us a Proficient for our Positive Learning Environment and a Proficient for our Culture of High Expectations. For the 2018-19 school year, we are expanding our focus to academic support via push-in and pull-out services and supporting academic partnerships. As a result of further developing the community school model, the following measurable benchmarks will be achieved by June 2019: Student attendance will be at least 93% and chronic absenteeism will be reduced by 5 percentage points  The NYC School Survey aggregate score will be 85% or higher   QR Indicator 1.4 for Culture of Mutual Trust and Positive Attitudes will be Well Developed  The number of students who are at level 2, level 3, and level 4 in math and ELA will all increase by 5 percentage points Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve The overarching community school goal is for us to create a climate that better supports learning. High expectations, attendance, and school climate are critical to support learning. Achieving all of these goals will result in improved academic outcomes. Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. Community School Core Service Area Target Population CBO Partner Description of SY17-18 CS SMART Service Goal Revenue Source Attendance Supports Chronically absent and at-risk students Replications, TAPS Staff ELT-social emotional health and wellness All students TAPS Staff Success MentorsPeer-to-Peer Mentors By June 2019, the chronic absence and at-risk rates will reduce by five percentage points. Community School CBO budget Monday through Friday morning Advisory programming By June 2019, the Quality Review rating for Supportive Environment will be Well Developed. Community school and Renewal funds 2018-19 RSCEP-R 59 ELT-academics All students TAPS Teachers CBO staff ELT-enrichment all students TAPS teachers, Replications, Educational Alchemy, Children’s Village Family engagement All families Replications and school staff Health and wellness All students Replications’ Social Worker, Morris Heights, and Astor Wednesday and Thursday after school core content academic instruction Wednesday and Thursday after school arts and enrichment programming Family programming, including parenting and wellness classes and ELL classes and GED classes Augmented counseling support By June 2018, the Quality Review rating for High Expectations will be Well Developed. Community school and Renewal funds By June 2019, the School Survey for student engagement will be at 85% or higher. Community School, Renewal, & SONYC funds By June 2019, the School Survey for student engagement will be at 85% or higher. School and Title I funds Community School funds By June 2019, the School Survey for student engagement will be at 85% or higher. Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 60  Key strategies for leveraging the Community School Director Include:  Use the Community School Team (CST), led by the Community School Director, that meets weekly to coordinate CBO efforts with the school and that regularly reviews data to relevant its key areas of work: attendance, community outreach, and school environment  Use the Community School Cabinet, which consists of the principal, one or more assistant principals, Replications’ CSD and program manager, to guide and supervise the community school work;  Use the Expanded Learning Time Team to organize, facilitate, and monitor the school’s ELT program  Include CBO staff as members of school teams, such as the Attendance Team, PBIS Team, Family Engagement Team, and attend team meeting such as grade level team meetings and content team meetings Structures help us identify individual needs and individualize services to meet them:  The Pupil Support Team, which includes social workers, a psychologist, a guidance counselor, a special education teacher, and an administrator, determines Level 2 and 3 interventions in support of students that include one or more of the following: social services support, parent conferences, counseling, psychological evaluations, medical help, academic support, etc. This team will include the CSD and representatives from CBOs providing mental health support services.  The Attendance Team, which is led by the CSD and includes CBO staff, the Parent Coordinator, guidance counselors, school staff and leadership, and the district attendance teacher, is responsible for tracking and improving overall student attendance, and reducing the rate of chronic absenteeism, through interventions, incentives and celebrations.  The Family Engagement, which is charged with parent outreach and engagement. As this team inquires into the circumstances behind absences, it makes referrals to the Pupil Support Team as well. Currently, we and our partners offer counseling, social work, and health and mental health services.  The Replications community school support team, which will provide Success Mentoring, ELT programming, academic support, community outreach and school environment support for students and teachers. Our overarching strategy for making The Angelo Patri Middle School a place where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children is the Community School Team, which meets weekly. The CST, is comprised of key school and community leaders, and is the formal place for ensuring that participating community members have a voice in the life and development of the school. The Team’s primary job is to create policies and plans that:  Align student out-of-school time with classroom learning  Bring communities, families, and the school together  Coordinate resources for children and families The CST includes the Community School Cabinet and is comprised of the school-based personnel who are authorized to oversee execution of the Team’s plans and policies. The CST develops and communicates a shared vision and clarity around roles, responsibilities, goals, expectations, and key tasks. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 61  A key element of this system is the Replications Program Manager, who helps the CST design systems that proactively minimize conflict by troubleshooting situations that lead to it. Another is the CST’s representative, who represents the community organizations on the School Leadership Team. Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Community Partner Scope of Involvement:  Replications  o Lead CBO and coordinator of Community School work o Provider of arts enrichment o Leader of Success Mentoring programming o Provider of parent involvement support o Provider of full-time social worker  Children’s Village: Provider of ELT and after school programming  Educational Alchemy: Provider of ELT enrichment programming  Astor Services: Provider of social work and student and family counseling services  Morris Heights: Provider of social work, student and family counseling services, and medical clinic services Strategies to ensure that we use data effectively and efficiently to support our students:  Have key teams--such as the Attendance Team and Grade Level Teams--include review of key data sorter reports, such as the Heatmap and intervention reports, at every meeting Follow DataWise and MeetingWise protocols   Assign individuals to update the DataSorter on a weekly basis and review those updates on a weekly basis to ensure accountability and that appropriate interventions are provided to the right students. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. The Community School Director and the Replications Program Manager are the core resources for implementing the Community School Program. The Community School Director is site based and charged with leading in the development of a culture that welcomes, values, and engages the community in Angelo Patri. The Replications Program Manager is in charge of helping the administration to develop systems that support a caring, collaborative culture that is self-renewing. Together, they help administration and teachers determine how to organize and prioritize their resources. They manage contracts with community school supported vendors and coordinate community school and NYCDOE efforts so that operations are smooth and diverse agendas are honored. Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 62    By June 30: Complete and submit CS budget and RSCEP  By June 30: Complete the master schedule for 2018-19  By July 31: Community School Team calendar set  By July 31: Generate a list of programs and services that will occur in the school  By July 31: Complete an implementation plan that includes monitoring protocols and evaluation benchmarks  By August 4th: All SY18-19 staffing is complete  By August 4th: Mental Health Plan is complete  By August 18th: Complete summer professional development for Community School staff  By August 18th: Complete summer orientation plan for students and families  By August 18th: MOU’s and contracts with key partners are executed  By September 10: Faculty members participate in Community School Plan orientation  By September 15: Community events calendar goes to parents and teachers  By October 1: All key community school teams (CST, FET, Attendance, PBIS, Principal’s Cabinet, SLT, PPT, Grade Level Teams) have met and completed a data study cycle  By November 15, January 31, March 31, May 31: CST has completed quarterly progress monitoring data study meetings  By May 31, 2019: Community School Forum completed Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 63  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Lowest third and students needing additional support in ESL Lowest third and students needing additional support in math skills Lowest third and students needing additional support. Lowest third and students needing additional support At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students are self-referred or teacher referred based on Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Guided reading - 100 book challenge, Imagine Learning, MyOn and I- Ready ELA, supplemental support for classroom activities Skills-based instruction focused on pre-requisite skills needed to support grade level instruction. I- Ready Math, supplemental support for classroom activities Skills-based instruction focused reading and writing in Science and developing academic vocabulary Skills-based instruction focused reading and responding to DBQs and developing academic vocabulary Group support for shared issues that are impacting academic success Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Whole class, small groups, pull-out, maximum of 8 students Services provided during the school day, after school, and/or Saturdays Whole class, small groups, pull-out, maximum of 8 students. Services provided during the school day, after school, and/or Saturdays Whole class, small groups, pull-out, maximum of 8 students. Whole class, small groups, pull-out, maximum of 8 students. Services provided during the school day, after school, and/or Saturdays Whole class, small groups, pull-out, maximum of 8 students. Services are delivered primarily in groups, with some individual services. During the school day and after school. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 64  classroom interventions 2018-19 RSCEP-R 65  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Approximately 114 students are in Temporary Housing. A survey is provided to assess the needs of families. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. STH will receive support services through our mental health providers. They will also be receiving uniforms and school supplies from The Angelo Patri School. The CSD will be working in tangent with these families to support them through the process of acquiring housing as well as any other needs that arise. STH will have access to academic intervention services based on their needs, social-emotional support as needed as well. STH will also have access to academic intervention services, based on their needs, social-emotional support as needed, and opportunities to participate in other enrichment opportunities. The families of STH will be given information and referrals to outside agencies for additional support and interventions. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 66  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-R 67  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We work closely with the NYC DOE Office of Teacher Recruitment. New hires come from teacher training programs that partner with the NYC DOE, specifically NYC Select Recruits. New hires are identified in the New Teacher Finder Program and open market while attending multiple recruitment fairs. Mentor services are provided to probationary teachers by Lead Teachers (ELA and Math) and content area teachers identified as instructional leads. We spend weekly professional learning time focused on elements of instruction (setting outcomes, questioning and discussion, assessment, etc). Weekly common planning meetings by grade and content are focused on sharing of best instructional practices, curriculum development, lesson planning, assessment and using data to drive instruction. Teacher teams examine student work products using a Modified SIP protocol to identify areas of strength and areas in need of improvement. Lead teachers provide one-to-one support for new, probationary and developing teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Cycles of professional learning will begin with analysis of a student data source to identify a learner centered problem or gap. Subsequent sessions will focus on professional learning to address the gaps, planning, implementation, teacher debrief and review of student work to measure the impact of the professional development on instruction. All teachers will participate in Professional development that focuses on Planning and Preparation and Engaging Students in Learning (Danielson Framework for Teaching – Components 1a,1e 3c) Math – Teachers will participate in Professional Development with support of consultants, coaches, and/or district ten field support team 2018-19 RSCEP-R 68  Social Studies – Teachers will participate in professional development that focuses on using Primary Sources for inquiry learning. Science – Teachers will participate in professional development focused on developing inquiry lessons. Professional development will be provided to support ESL teachers and teachers of SWDs with curriculum modifications in order to provide multiple points of entry. ELA teachers will participate in the Teachers College Writing Project to inform our efforts to explicitly teach writing skills and establish a school-wide writing rubric. The school wide writing rubric will be used to support literacy development throughout all the content areas. ENL teachers will participate in the Teachers College Writing project to inform our efforts to explicitly teach writing skills. ENL teachers will participate in Imagine Learning professional learning to support them in provided additional data driven instruction based on their assessment data During Initial Planning Conferences teachers reflect on areas of growth and need. This information is used to provide individualized support and learning opportunities based on needs. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Not Applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 2018-19 RSCEP-R 69  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our weekly common planning meetings organized by grade and content area, focus on assessment and using data to drive instruction. Teacher teams design formative and summative assessments based on curriculum implementation. Teachers are identified in each content area to participate in a curriculum planning team. This teams works to design curriculum and school-wide performance assessments. The units in each content area include performance tasks and a unit exam. Teacher teams examine student work products using a Modified SIP protocol to identify areas of strength and areas in need of improvement. Teachers use this information to create action plans that include identification of instructional strategies that support student success and identify strategies that address student needs. Item Analysis: Teachers and administrators use the item analysis from the 2014 State exams (ELA and Math) and MOSL local assessments to identify key standards to drive instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) $460,203.00 X Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A-Rigorous Instruction Section 5B- Supportive Environment Section 5C-Collaborative Teachers Section 5D-Effective School Leadership Section 5E- Strong Family Comm Ties 2018-19 RSCEP-R 70  Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal $16,979.00 $88,609.00 *includes parental engagement funds X Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal 0 $26,318.00 0 $5,103,423.00 N/A X N/A X Tax Levy (FSF) Local Section 6- ELT N/A Section 5A-Rigorous Instruction Section 5B- Supportive Environment Section 5C-Collaborative Teachers Section 5D-Effective School Leadership Section 5E- Strong FamilyCommTies Section 6-ELT N/A Section 5A-Rigorous Instruction Section 5B- Supportive Environment Section 5E- Strong FamilyCommTies N/A Section 5A-Rigorous Instruction Section 5B- Supportive Environment Section 5C-Collaborative Teachers Section 5D-Effective School Leadership 2018-19 RSCEP-R 71  Section 5E- Strong FamilyCommTies Section 6-ELT 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 2018-19 RSCEP-R 72  effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 73  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Angelo Patri Middle School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Angelo Patri Middle School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 74  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality he school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be 2018-19 RSCEP-R 75  involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Angelo Patri School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 RSCEP-R 76  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening, Saturdays and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 RSCEP-R 77  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 78  ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; inform school of change of address, telephone number or email address to keep the lines of communication open between school and families ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; wear school uniform on a daily basis engage in academic and enrichment activities to attain personal excellence 2018-19 RSCEP-R 79  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 80  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 RSCEP-R 81  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 7 7 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Begin description here: Rationale: 36% of our students are ELLs. The purpose of The Saturday Language Academy is to support our English Language Learners in language acquisition, vocabulary development, reading comprehension, writing and mathematics. The Academy services approximately 80 students in grades 6-8. For the ELA and Math component our students are placed in three groups. One group services 15 to 20 students new to the country or have less than one year in the NYC school system. These students use Imagine Learning, a computer based intervention with support in L1. With this program students will learn English through instructional strategies that focus on key vocabulary words and concept, phonics, word families and leveled text. They also listen to oral language and have the opportunity to record themselves as they become more proficient in English. The other two groups are for students who are in ENL and Bilingual classes, in grades 6-8. These students are grouped by proficiency level as well as grade. Students in these groups use the supplemental lessons from the Office of English Language Learners, Imagine Math and I-Ready to address the gaps in Math. For ELA they are using standards based instruction along with the 100 Book Challenge, I-Ready and Ready. The teachers of these other groups are also using the Collaborative Strategic Reading Model. They participate in independent reading, conferencing, developing power skills and guided reading groups. All students receive Mathematical instruction based on grade level. Within the grade they focus on high leverage low performing items identified from the 2016 NYS Math exam item analysis. All students receive an hour and a half of ELA and Mathematics instruction. The program is from 9:00-12:00 PM every Saturday and will run through April. The Saturday Academy begins October 11 and runs through April 26, 2019 for a total of 17 sessions. The teachers involved in the program are certified in bilingual education and/or ENL. Five teachers provide instruction during this time. Three teachers teach ENL and two teachers teach math. There will be one assistant principal to supervise the program. Afterschool will consist of our expanding students three times a week. There are approximately 20 students per grade that will receive additional instruction. This will be at cost. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration  topics to be covered 2018-19 RSCEP-R 82  Part C: Professional Development  name of provider Begin description here: Rationale: The rationale for providing our ELL teachers with professional development is to provide teachers with the techniques, skills and strategies to meet the needs of our ELL population. Teachers receiving the professional learning include Ms. Christian, Ms. Eberhart Ms. Tropp, and Ms. Bellen. As we hire additional ENL teachers they will also receive the professional learning and professional development provided. As we continue to move towards integrated co-teaching for our ENL scholars, professional learning will include the various models of co-teaching as well as how to plan for co-integrated classrooms. A consultant will be working with teachers through direct professional development as well as inter-visitations with immediate feedback to support teacher growth. Attendance agendas will be stored in Assistant Principal Shimkin's office for reference. The consultant will work with the teachers for 10 full day visits and will provide direct professional development during the Friday professional development time for teachers. Topics to be covered include but are not limited to: Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol, lesson planning to include language and content objectives, looking at student work and data analysis and strategies to address the needs of our ENLs based on developing reading, writing, and listening, vocabulary development, and oral language development. On-going professional development for teachers will be scheduled as needed. Since materials used are part of our daily instruction, professional development will be to reinforce the work to be done. Cost of consultant will be at cost. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: The parent engagement activity is a Saturday Language Academy which focuses on ENL for our immigrant parents. We have a large population of newcomers and their parents need support in learning English, developing skills to navigate the community and how to support their children’s achievement. During the Saturday Academy, parents participate in similar learning experiences as their children. Part of the day is dedicated to individualized instruction using Imagine Learning, a computer based program that focuses on oral language, academic vocabulary, instruction in the five essential components of reading, and strategic first-language support. In the other part of the block parents participate in the “100 Book Challenge”, a school wide initiative to support the development of reading skills. As part of this initiative, parents are leveled to find their 2018-19 RSCEP-R 83  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities independent reading level; they participate in reading books at their level and use skills cards based on their levels that include strategies to use as they further improve their literacy skills in L1. Both learning opportunities provide parents with a firsthand understanding on how to support their childrens' language development. Parents will also be involved in workshops to train families in supporting their students in mathematics and test- taking strategies. The facilitator is a teacher certified in Spanish and ESL. Attendance and agendas will be kept in the Assistant Principal's office. Topics for the Saturday Academy include but are not limited to: Conversation Starters Vocabulary and skill building around specific themes - community, family, employment All ENL parents will be invited to attend this academy that begins in October and runs through April. It is a three hour program from 9:00am to 12:00pm. There will be a total of at least thirty parents attending the academy. Parent textbooks and other materials will be purchased to support the program. Parents are using Ingles Para Ninos as a guide for their language instruction. Two teachers provide instruction. Parent Workshops from the Parent Coordinator include but are not limited to: Exploring the Common Core How to Help Your Children Succeed How to Support Your Child with the High School Application Building the Gap Between School and Home Workshop Social Media and Internet Safety. Understanding the Adolescent Child Acclimating to a Environment as an Newcomer Celebrations for our Families including moving up ceremonies which include training on the levels and movement of students in ENL (Progress Monitoring) These workshops are presented by school staff and the Parent Coordinator. Agendas and attendance will be recorded at the start of Family Workshops and maintained in the Parent Coordinator's office. Flyers, phone blasts, phone banking, and monthly calendars are sent to inform families of our learning events. Providers are from our school building as well as community agencies trained in specific topics. ESL teachers and materials provided for ESL sessions for parents are at no cost to the Title III Program. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 24424 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 84 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 24424 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 RSCEP-R 85  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name The Angelo Patri Middle School Borough Bronx School Number 391 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Giselle Fortiche Coach Heather Rohan ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Miriam Tropp Teacher/Subject Area Elizabeth Christian Teacher/Subject Area Dermott Myrie Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Maribel Hulla Assistant Principal Beth Shimkin Coach n/a School Counselor n/a Parent n/a Parent Coordinator Stacy Torres Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Ron Saltz, Replication C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 5 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 4 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 534 2018-19 RSCEP-R 86 Total number of ELLs 199 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 37.27%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. Spanish School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2001- 2017 K 1 2 3 4 5 0 TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 6 6 2 7 2 8 2 9 10 11 12 Tot # 0 2 2 2 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? MS391 provides Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning students with the Imagine Learning online program which regularly assesses student progress in language acquisition. . The iReady online program suite also records student progress in ELA and Math CC aligned skills along with small group intervention programs. At the beginning and end of TCRWP units, students complete baseline and performance tasks to assess growth in CCLS within ELA / ENL classrooms. Moreover, MS391 has an independent reading program in place, Independent Reading Level Assessment (IRLA), to level students' reading levels according to grade level and corresponding color. Beginning in the 2018 / 19 school year, ENLs will be recorded 3 times a year in a speaking interview to assess productive language acquisition beyond writing. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 87  The ELA and ENL department keeps a regular calendar for each unit, so that teachers know what skills are being assessed along with a clear timeline for skill acquisition. Trackers are used to assess mastery of key standards based on the units of study and supports staff in knowing which students need additional support. Imagine Learning has clear data tools to identify key needs of students which can provide teacher information for small group instruction. To assess this student writing, the department uses school-wide, normed rubrics, that promote literacy across all content areas. Pedagoges regularly analyze these formative assessments by content area and assess areas of student growth and make appropriate changes to instruction. As a community school, the DOE also monitors student growth within formative assessments in iReady. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? NYSESLAT / NYSETELL four modalities assessment data is compiled in a school Excel data sheet to monitor progress over the course of multiple grade levels, with corresponding state ELA data as applicable. Students also meet with pedagogues bimonthly to assess growth within the IRLA reading level framework to complete a reading assessment. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? At the beginning of the year, the ENL department meets to assess the Excel data sheet around NYSESLAT leveling and makes appropriate changes to student grouping in classrooms across grade level according to modality and CCLS aligned skills. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] At the beginning of the year, the ENL department meets to assess the Excel data sheet around NYSESLAT / NYSETELL leveling and makes appropriate changes to student grouping in classrooms across grade level according to modality and CCLS aligned skills. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. As mentioned above, state assessment data, the four modalities as assessed by the NYSESLAT, and CCLS aligned skills inform ELL programming and modifications within POD, grade level, and content area curriculum meetings and planning. Next year, we will continue to reach out to the Bronx Field Support Center to train staff school-wide specifically in the EDAT to continue to improve in modifications to instruction based on student data such as SIFE status, years of service, long-term ELL status, at-risk factors and other high-priority intervention data. We we also reach out to support key staff in determining additional modifications to support our ENL program. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Within common planning weekly, professional learning communities, and monthly Tuesday LAP team meetings, findings will be disseminated to the staff and adjustments will be made to the staff. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Entering and Emerging students will receive 1 unit (180 min.) of study in ENL and 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA with a certified K-12 pedagoge. Transitioning and Expanding students will receive 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA or other content 2018-19 RSCEP-R 88  area in an intergrated ENL model. Commanding students continue to receive additional services for two years with push-in services for .5 units of study from a K-12 Certified ESOl teacher in ELA or Math. b. TBE program. If applicable. Students will receive 180 minutes of HLA instruction from a SLA certified teacher. To date we are searching for a pedagouge to fill this position. Entering and Emerging students will receive 1 unit (180 min.) of study in ENL and 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA with a certified K-12 pedagouge. Transitioning and Expanding students will receive 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA or other content area in an intergrated ENL model. Commanding students continue to receive additional services for two years with push-in services for .5 units of study from a K-12 Certified ESOl teacher in ELA or Math. Additionally, in the content areas of Math, Science, and Social Studies, Entering and Emerging students receive instruction in a minimum of 2 classes with a bilingual pedagogue. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We are programming our students based on student NYSESLAT data, and teacher conversation, to ensure appropriate instructional minutes are delivered in each program. In some cases we are increasing the number of minutes based on what we know about our students. As the majority of our ENL and TBE students are far below grade level increasing the minutes will continue to support their need for increased time in ENL classes. The use of the New Progressions will support student learning based on the standards and activities provided. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our ENL / TBE program provides instruction in English Language Arts while concentrating on English language acquisition through instructional approaches and methods such as, the use of cognates from L1, word study and vocabulary programs that plan for Tier 1, 2, and 3 progression, prediction activities, speaking and listening based activities with targeted language, small group instruction, writing around specific language framework, recycling of language specific to units, accountable talk language strings / cards, visuals and pictures, SIOP strategies with modeling and demonstration, multimedia and technology, choral reading and fluency, question and discussion literacy circles, reader's theatre, TPR. Teachers model expectations and standard based responses. Teachers focus student learning around I Can statements. Teachers assess if students have achieved each I Can statement and then are able to modify and adapt instruction as a result of summative and formative assessments used throughout the learning cycle. In our TBE programs instruction is taught in both English and Spanish in the content areas, such as Science, Social Studies and Math. Teachers begin their instrucitonal model with 60% in students native language and by the end of the school year have tapered off to 25% with continued supports to ensure student understanding and academic growth in reading, writing, listening and speaking. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? At the beginning of enrollment, Spanish Bilingual ELLs take a Spanish LAB assessment to determine home language level. Concurrently, students are assessed using the IRLA in English and Spanish to monitor progress in literacy level. TBE teachers informally assess students home language level through interview and conversation. At the end of the year, students take the ELE assessment to determine language growth around reading and writing in Spanish. ELL's are appropriately evaluated in their native language throughout the school year using the Spanish IRLA. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 89  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE: Afterschool or in-school individual counseling for social-emotional support. Additional academic support in L1, Math, ELA or other academic programs. Entering and Emerging: AIR curriculum for newcomers and other DOE supported curriculum provided through DELLS with additional support for staff in other content areas to participate in professional development centered around supporting this subgroup of students. As mentioned earlier, students receive language and literacy intervention from ESL computer programs such as Imagine Learning and MyON in both their L1 and L2. Transitioning and Expanding: iReady programing provides interventions around CCLS skills in both Math and ELA, allowing instruction in small groups with target students from this population. Transitioning and Expanding receive more small group instruction to support language development and truly pinpoint where their areas of need are as readers, writers, speakers and listeners through specific activities to meet their needs. Long-term and Former ELLs: Receive push-in support to content areas with aforementioned instructional strategies from Part IV, Question #3. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? SIFE: Afterschool or in-school individual counseling for social-emotional support. Additional academic support in L1, Math, ELA or other academic programs. Imagine Learning is used to support students in language acquisition and data is closely analyzed to determine what next steps are needed. Entering and Emerging: AIR curriculum for newcomers and other DOE supported curriculum provided through DELLS with additional support for staff in other content areas to participate in professional development centered around supporting this subgroup of students. As mentioned earlier, students receive language and literacy intervention from ESL computer programs such as Imagine Learning and MyON in both their L1 and L2. Transitioning and Expanding: iReady programing provides interventions around CCLS skills in both Math and ELA, allowing instruction in small groups with target students from this population. All students will be assessed using Imagine Learning to determine level of language acquisition and next steps around groupings and instruction. Long-term and Former ELLs: Receive push-in support to content areas with aforementioned instructional strategies from Part IV, Question #3. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? SIFE: Afterschool or in-school individual counseling for social-emotional support. Additional academic support in L1, Math, ELA or other academic programs. Entering and Emerging: AIR curriculum for newcomers and other DOE supported curriculum provided through DELLS with additional support for staff in other content areas to participate in professional development centered around supporting this subgroup of students. As mentioned earlier, students receive language and literacy intervention from ENL computer programs such as Imagine Learning and MyON in both their L1 and L2. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 90  Transitioning and Expanding: iReady programing provides interventions around CCLS skills in both Math and ELA, allowing instruction in small groups with target students from this population. Long-term and Former ELLs: Receive push-in support to content areas withaforementioned instructional strategies from Part IV, Question #3. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELA students use The 100 Book Challenge, iReady, Imagine Learning, Reader's Theatre. In math, students use iReady and teacher created performance tasks modified for specific aforementioned groupings. Students are also involved in extended day activities based on level and need in ELA and Math. Additionally, a Saturday academy is offered to provide students with learning trips and additional language programming. In Math, students who are level 1's participate in the Saturday Academy for Math intervention. Students who are level 1 and level 2 participate in extended day. Students in monolingual classes receive push-in services in Social Studies and Science. As the school moves towards a single session schedule, these content area teachers will plan with ENL teachers for in-class instruction with the assistance of SIOP strategies. The ENL teachers will be able to support student learning by breaking down the content and assignments for further understanding in more meaningful ways for these specific subpopulations. Students are also participate in a Saturday Language Academy. These students are new to the country and participate in language acquisition activities as well as using Imagine Learning. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Continue to explore the New Progressions to further expertise in planning. School-wide professional learning around strategies for ENLs, Newcomers, and SIFE students with the Bronx Field Center. Finally, develop specific activities for Parents of ENLs based on time in the country, parent feedback forms, and other relevant data from EDAT and other data tools.. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Students are afforded equal access to all school programs by being provided access to after school programs in academics and the arts, Saturday Academy for academic achievement, Saturday Language Academy, and CBO afterschool programming PRIME. Students are also afforded equal access by participating in CBO programs based on the arts. Some of these experiences include Educational Alchemy, Broadway Jr, Red Bull Theater, and DreamYard. These programs are offered in both Spanish and English. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials to support ENL students include but are not limited to: Imagine Learning; IRLA 100 Book Challenge; Khan Academy - bilingual Math; Starfall; MyON; Books in Spanish, French, and English; in Math students use NTN Math,; EngageNY problem-based tasks for ELA; textbooks in Science used as resources to support instruction for PBL; and Passports for Social Studies which has been translated in Spanish for this year. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 91  TBE home language supports begin at 75% and there is a gradual release as the school year progresses. Free standing ESL students receive home language support 25% of the time throughout the course of the school year. we do not have a Dual Language Program so this is not applicable. Resources and textbooks are available in students home language in content areas as well as independent reading. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Using assessment data from the NYSESLAT and NYSISTEL, students are assigned required services for their age and grade level. We use a push-in and pull-out model as well as have additional support in classrooms where the teacher is not a certified ENL teacher. Materials and resources are age appropriate because curriculum and instruction is modified by the teachers to meet the needs of the students. Students use high interest, low level materials when necessary to support their learning. . 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). When new students arrive at the school, besides the evaluating and assessing of the students ENL status, students meet with the guidance counselor to gather information and transition them into the school. Newly enrolled ENL's are buddied up with a classmate to help them navigate the school and help them transition into the school culture. We are also looking to have a 2 day program before the school year begins for the students from our feeder schools to assess their academic and social emotional needs before the school year begins. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? For the coming school year, Professional Learning will be around Questioning and Discussion and how to Best Support our ENL Students with Minds-on Engagement. We will also have Professional Learning around Advanced Literacy, a District 10 Initiative. As a Community School we will be looking to hire a consultant/coach to support ENL and Bilingual Teachers. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 2018-19 RSCEP-R 92  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 1. The professional development plan for our ELL personnel at The Angelo Patri School includes weekly team meetings, consultant work, professional development activities provided by the FSC and outside professional learning activities.. Weekly team meetings include data analysis, curriculum analysis and development, professional reading and the continued exploration of ENL strategies to support student achievement. Teachers that teach ENL classes in the content areas meet weekly in grade level teams by content. During these weekly meetings teachers are involved in data analysis, curriculum analysis and development, professional readings and the study of effective ESL strategies to support their students. ESL teachers teaching ELA use Expeditionary Learning and Teacher's College Writing as their core curricula and during professional learning they determine how to best meet the needs of their students using ESL strategies to drive the discussion. Teachers in the content area receive professional development around Strategies to Support Our ELL's as readers and writers, Planning with Content and Lingusitic Objectives in Mind, and Engagement in the ENL Classroom, to name a few. Using data teachers are able to determine next steps, strengths and weaknesses and how to effectively meet the needs of their students. Teachers who participate in outside professional learning will turnkey their learning to maximize on their learning and build capacity within their departments. We have an ENL consultant who comes in once a month and we are looking for another consultant. These consultants support the teachers in planning, instruction and the classroom environment. The consultant supports the teachers through visitations, modeling, individual conferences and planning sessions and team meetings. All other personnel are involved in our monthly professional development sessions and involved in the reading initiative within the school. Educational assistants are training in our computer based programs and the 100 Book Challenge to support students language acquisition and academic growth. 2. Professional Development for teachers of ENL's includes weekly team planning meetings by grade and content, along with ENL teachers meeting weekly for ELA instruction. At these weekly meetings, teachers meet to discuss planning, delivery of instruction, data analysis and how to integrate ENL strategies into their planning and instruction. Teachers analyze data and formulate next steps based on data from formative and summative assessments, reading assessments, and conferencing notes. Teachers use the Common Core Learning Standards to design, assess and evaluate instruction, assessments and student learning. 3. To support our teachers of ENL's in supporting our ENL's in transitioning to middle school a series of assessments are used to assess student entry points and help determine teachers' instruction. The use of these assessments helps teachers begin to understand student needs and support students in understanding their learning needs. We create small learning communities within the school and have monthly pod meetings to to discuss goals and the vision of the school. We also discuss the expectations of the school and share steps to help them acclimate to the school environment. The small learning communities support the "family" feeling and all teachers are introduced as support systems. For families, we hold Meet and Greets in September to support parental involvement and share our goals for the school year. At these Meet and Greets, families and their children are introduced to their childrens' teachers, and share instructional expectations and goals. We also have support staff available, a guidance counselor, PBIS coaches, and a Wellness Center to support the social emotional needs of the incoming middle school students. 4. At The Angelo Patri School we provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 is dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours is dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Agendas are maintained for all professional development activities and common planning meetings to accurately ensure the mandated hours of professional development has been provided. With the support of a consultant, teachers of ENL students will have professional development on the teaching our ELL students. Teachers will have the opportunity to have professional learning in vocabulary development, ENL strategies to develop language acquisition to name a few. Teachers of ENL students will also participate in common planning around strategies for instruction, planning, book study around research based strategies and data analysis to support teaching and planning. Agendas will be kept of all professional learning activities. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 93  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Teachers can use the Tuesday 40 minutes to meet with parents if there is any interpretation that they need. Teachers will be trained in how to use the interpretation from the DOE to decrease any language barrier. Teachers will be trained by the parent coordinator. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are involved in ENL celebrations. For the upcoming school year we will continue to develop programming. Parent involvement includes but it not limited to monthly workshops on curriculum and instruction, expectations for our learners, a Language Academy for Parents to teach English. The parent coordinator establishes the focus of the workshops with the support of administration and the Community School Director. She works closely with content area teachers to design workshops that include learning for parents to support their children at home. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 94 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Giselle Fortiche, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 95  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Angelo Patri Middle School School DBN: 10X391 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Giselle Fortiche Title Principal Beth Shimkin Assistant Principal Stacy Torres Parent Coordinator Miriam Tropp ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Elizabeth Christian Teacher/Subject Area Dermott Myrie Teacher/Subject Area Heather Rohan Maribel Hulla Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Ron Saltz Other Replication Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 RSCEP-R 96  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10X391 School Name: Angelo Patri Middle School; MS 391 Superintendent: Maribel Hulla The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Wendy Portillo Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. All students complete blue emergency card forms which require parents to inform the school about their translation needs. ELL parents or newcomers are also administered the home language survey and have an interview to ensure that the school is aware of all translation and interpretation needs. The parent coordinator works with teachers, the DOE, and outside contractors to ensure all parents' translation needs are met. Along with this, we use the ATS report (RAPL) that specifies the preferred language of parent, ATS report UPPG which delineates the language parents prefer both orally and in writing. Parent surveys and a School Staff Language 2018-19 RSCEP-R 97  Survey are given at the beginning of the school year to determine any new translation services to provide and staff availability for translation services in-house. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali Soninke Fulani French Mandinka 1 6 9 3 3 3 0.1 0.6 0.15 0.15 0.45 0.3 2 4 1 1 3 2 0.3 0.6 0.15 0.15 0.45 0.3 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. No languages represent at least 10% of the school population Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Monthly Calendar and Communications from the Principal School Newsletter Parents' Bill of Rights, Revised Discipline Code, Student Behavioral Contract Monthly or as needed Quarterly September Parent Handbook September In-house translation for Spanish In-house translation for Spanish Available in 9 languages from the Office of OBEWL Other documents translated ifor Arabic, French and Spanish In-house translation for Spanish 2018-19 RSCEP-R 98  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide SLC/Parent Teacher Conferences November, February and May SLT Meetings Once a month Families of ENL Students NIght September through May - 3 meetings Families Night for New to the Country Families and Students Early October and February (additional as needed) Attendance Meetings As needed 8th grade High School Articulation October In-House High School Fair October Tuesday Parent Engagement Every Tuesday interpretation service(s)? In-house translation for Spanish and Language Line DOE services for parents In-house translation for Spanish and Language Line DOE services for parents In-house translation for Spanish and Language Line DOE Services for parents In-house translation for Spanish and The Big Word in person interpretation contracted DOE translation services In-house translation for Spanish during a separate session and Language Live DOE services for parents In-house translation for Spanish and Language Line Doe services for parents In-house translation for Spanish and Language Line DOE services In-house translation for Spanish and Language Live DOE services for parents. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. MS391 will contact all parents based on blue emergency card information and will use the school messaging / phone blast service for outreach in English and Spanish. On a case-by-case need for less prominent language groups, MS391 will use the DOE language line to notify parents in the event of a school emergency Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our parent coordinator will train staff in September / October during after school PD time on one of the Mondays in these first two months. Staff will be trained on the use of translation services and over the phone interpretation 2018-19 RSCEP-R 99  services like the DOE Language Line along with any outside providers that are available. The parent coordinator will also bring in a leader from the DOE Office of Translation to hold a small workshop. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from limited-English-proficient parents on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services A survey will be put in place to gather feedback from parents, translated into parents’ L1, which will assess their satisfaction with the translation services provided, as well as any additional services needed so that we can improve our communication and parental ties. The parent coordinator, PTA leader, and ELL specialist will analyze data from the survey to compile next steps and present findings to the SLT. The Home Language Survey will also be used to provide the school with data around the languages fo our families. We will be able to compile a list of languages for our staff when outreach is needed.to the DOE Language Line. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 100 
