 08X530 School Name: LONGWOOD PREP FOR TECHNOLOGY AND MEDIA DESIGN Principal: ASYA JOHNSON 2018-19 RSCEP-ON 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Career and Technical Education (CTE) Programs (for high schools) Section 10: Professional Development Plan Section 11: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 12: Title I Program Information Section 13: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information LongwoodPreparatory Academy 320800011530 9-12 965 Longwood Avenue, Bronx NY 10459 School Number (DBN): 08X530 7188601242 Phone Number: 7188601934 Fax: AsyaJohnson ajohnson64@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Geographical District: 8 Center for Supportive Schools Email Address: AsyaJohnson Evelyn Canela Cristina Abellas ChantelWoodson Kerry Roberson Elizabeth Mojica Luis Mojica Andrew Santos District Information CarronStaple Superintendent: 1 FordhamPlaza, Room 833 Superintendent’s Office Address: cstaple@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5834 Phone Number: 718-935-3948 Fax: 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 3  FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx NY 10458 JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-741-7746 Fax: 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. School Receivership In April 2015, state lawmakers and Governor Andrew Cuomo created section 211-f of the State Education Law, which established the School Receivership program as a new intervention strategy to turn around struggling schools. This new law, and Commissioner’s regulation 100.19, requires that “Persistently Struggling Schools,” defined as Priority Schools that have been in the most severe accountability status since the 2006-07 school year, be given an initial one or two-year period under a “Superintendent Receiver”. These schools were placed in receivership under the New York City Schools Chancellor. Each school must make demonstrable improvement on specific benchmarks or it will be placed under an independent receiver. Under the Chancellor’s Receivership Plan, the School Renewal Program is NYCDOE’s 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 5  core strategy for turning around struggling schools. Renewal Schools have already begun implementing significant interventions and are receiving additional resources and support to accelerate student performance and help close achievement gaps reflected in this RSCEP. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. The RSCEP will also enable Renewal Schools that were designated as “Out of Time” Priority Schools during the 2014-15 school year to respond to additional state-mandated requirements, including: providing students access to Career and Technical Education (CTE) program offerings at schools in Good Standing beginning in the 2018-19 school year; and, mandatory professional development for school leadership and staff. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 6  The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 7  In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 8  on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional SLT exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit the school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update the school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Community School, Career and Technical Education Program (CTE), and Professional Development Plan sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT x x x x ` x x Name Position and Constituent Group Asya Johnson Cristina Abellas ChantelWoodson Kerry Roberson Elizabeth Mojica Evelyn Canela Luis MojicaJr. Andrew Santos Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 10  Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) TianaMillen Wendy Nathaniel Miriam Castillo Pedro Garcia Luis MojicaSr. AurisisPena RosbyVazquez Jennifer Guzman X X x x X x X x Teacher Teacher Parent Student Parent Counselor Student Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Community Engagement Team (CET) Signature Page Directions: Please fill out this form and indicate members of your Community Engagement Team. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each Community Engagement Team member in the first column. 2. Record the position and constituent group represented in the second column. 3. Community Engagement Team members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If a Community Engagement Team member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original signature page. AsyaJohnson Marcel Deans Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Principal DSR 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 11 Signature (Blue Ink) Name Position and Constituent Group Evelyn Canela Luis Mojica Andrew Santos ChantelWoodson CristinaAbellas Luis MojicaSr. Elizabeth Mojica Kenneth Carrington n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Represented Community School Director Student Student PTAPresident UFTRep Parent Parent DC37 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 12  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. Longwood Preparatory Academy, also known as the Prep, is a small school with an enrollment of 350 students, which consist of 32% African-Americans, 66% Latino and 2% Asian. Of these students, 22% are English Language Learners and 30% are scholars with disabilities. The average daily attendance during the 2017-18 school year was 81.5%. During the 2018-2019 school year, Longwood Preparatory Academy will be consolidated with Holcombe L. Rucker High School for Community Research. Great Schools Framework Progress: During the 2016-2017 school year, 65% of our 9th graders earned enough credits to be on track for graduation and 68% of 10th graders were on track for graduation. Our college and career readiness target was 8.6%, however, our outcome was 25%. Our approved college or career preparatory courses target was between 17.8% and 22.3%, however, our outcome was 25% . Great Schools Framework Challenges: While our school is approaching its target in student achievement, our 4-year graduation rate during the 2016-2017 school year was 50%; 17% less than our peer index. Our 6-year graduation rate was 57%; 14% less than our peer index. And our attendance was 80%, 9% less than the city-wide average for attendance. Strategic Partnerships: Based on the needs of our students, we have selected the Center for Supportive Schools as our lead CBO. Additionally, we will be partnering with PENCIL, Co-Op Tech, Justice Resource Center, Center for Supportive Schools, Monroe College, Borough of Manhattan Community College, and Good Shepherd Services. We will continue collaborating with buildOn however, this year our school will have a new lead Community Based Organization with the Center for Supportive Schools. We hope to partner with Building Beats, DCTV, and Bronx Arts Ensemble. Description of our primary Strategic Partnerships: Center for Supportive Schools (CSS)- develops, disseminates, and promotes peer leadership, advisory, and other evidence-based strategies that enable and inspire schools to more fully engage scholars in learning, better connect scholars to their schools, motivate and equip scholars to make decisions responsibly, and accelerate academic achievement. The highlight of the CSS program is the Peer Group Connection (PGC). Through PGC, CSS trains school faculty to teach leadership courses to select groups of older students, who in turn educate and support younger students. CCS Transition to High School: High School Juniors and Seniors Supporting Freshmen in their Transition to High School Peer Group Connection (PGC) for High Schools is an evidence-based program that supports and eases students’ 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 13  successful transition from middle to high school. The program taps into the power of high school juniors and seniors to create a nurturing environment for incoming freshmen. Once per week, pairs of junior and senior peer leaders meet with groups of 10-14 freshmen in outreach sessions designed to strengthen relationships among scholars across grades. These peer leaders are simultaneously enrolled in a daily, for-credit, year-long leadership course taught by school faculty during regular school hours. PGC is CSS’s seminal peer leadership program, and has been implemented with a 70% sustainability rate in more than 175 high schools since 1979. A recently released, four-year longitudinal, randomized-control study conducted by Rutgers University and funded by the United States Department of Health and Human Services found that, among other major results, PGC improves the graduation rates of student participants in an inner city public school by ten percentage points and cuts by half the number of male scholars who would otherwise drop out. Secondary Strategic Partnerships: PENCIL-is the leader in creating innovative and impactful models of collaboration between the business and education communities. PENCIL works at the intersection of school needs and business expertise to bring together the best ideas, talent, and resources across sectors to improve public school and student performance and enhance workforce pathways. PENCIL Points of Engagement are tailored employee engagement opportunities offered by PENCIL to provide our corporate partners with single-day, student-centered volunteer events that directly impact New York City public schools. PENCIL Points serve both as an entry into PENCIL’s student facing programming and a way to broaden the work of our existing partners. Through these events, PENCIL and our skilled network of business volunteers have been able to increase the college and career readiness skills of hundreds of scholars through activities such as mock interviewing, professional networking, and personal branding. Build-On is a community based organization that supports Longwood preparatory academy scholars through the engagement of community service opportunities, International Trek experiences, Mentorship and Deutsch Bank/Nasdaq Internship Programs. Cooperative and Technical Education: CoOp Tech-Coop Tech offers classes in all five boroughs that provide scholars with cutting edge trade classes and technology training that meet the growing demands of our nation's workplace. Many scholars in Coop Tech are given the opportunity to take part in the Department of Education's Work Based Learning Program (WBL) which provides job readiness skills knowledge of basic safety and OSHA procedures, CPR, and real world of work exposure. Upon recommendation from program faculty, each student can be matched with one of Coop Tech's intern partnership sites. scholars are encouraged to take full advantage of internship opportunities as they build their portfolios and expand their skills for future employment. Eligible scholars who participate in paid internships receive minimum wage in addition to real work experience. Student Success Center (Good Shepherd’s Services) The Student Success Center will strengthen the college going culture at the Longwood Educational Campus by exposing scholars to post-secondary options and supporting the process of applying to college. Through workshops and events Youth Leaders and SSC staff will lead early awareness for 9th and 10th graders, and will work one-on-one to support juniors and seniors with college and financial aid applications. The SSC will also increase parent engagement by informing families of pre-college programs and various supports needed in the student’s process. Expanded Learning Time: 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 14  Our expanded learning time has been allotted for Regents Preparation courses, online blended learning classes, remediation and/or college readiness classes and is embedded in the school day. Regents preparation courses will be given to scholars who failed to meet passing scores for a local or regents diploma. Using historical assessment data, scholars with IEPs who scored between a 60-64 will retake specific regents exams in order to obtain a regents diploma. While scholars with computer and internet access can work on their online course at home, all scholars who need to recover credits in order to graduate will be provided the opportunity to earn credit through rigorous APEX courses or through blended learning courses or targeted credit recovery. Remediation courses will be provided to scholars with a math and reading ability below a 5th grade level. College Readiness courses in Math will be provided through our partnership with LINCT for scholars who scored between a 65-79 on the Common Core Algebra regents. Small group tutoring and intervention will be provide students who scored between a 55-74 on the Common Core ELA regents. Justice Resource Center: The Justice Resource Center (JRC) is the leading provider of law-related and civic education for the school-age population. Our history has defined the work we do at the JRC. The vision of the original founders of law-related education led the JRC to become an international model, demonstrating what can be done in inner cities around the world. The JRC is an outgrowth of a Mayoral Blue Ribbon Commission formed, in 1988, by the late Mayor Edward Koch, whose mission was to establish the first Law and Justice program in NYC public schools. The commission was led by a prominent attorney, Tom Evans, and the late Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward. The Commission members were heads of agencies throughout NYC. The first Law & Justice Institute was established at Martin Luther King, Jr. High School. After the first four years of the Law & Justice Institute, 99% of the students in that first year program went on to college and the remaining 1% enrolled in the military. Based on its success, the program was replicated throughout the NYC public schools. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 15  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 08X530 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 199 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 45 45 5 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 29 17 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 88.0% % Attendance Rate 87.4% % Reduced Lunch 21.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 66.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.7 0% 21% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 54% 50% 46.2% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 110 104 8 81.5% 1.0% 29.6% 29.6% 1.5% 0.5% 2 37% 4 N/A N/A 44% 48% 60.8% N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 1. Instruction at our school is customized and inclusive of all students and their learning needs through the implementation of the Engage NY curriculum in ELA & Math, the New Visions curriculum in Global History, Living Environment, and Earth Science and lastly the CUNY Debating United States History (DUSH) curriculum. High standards are set through the daily implementation of this curriculum and students engage in tasks that support their prior knowledge and challenge their thinking on a daily basis. On our most recent Quality Review, we receive Proficient in both 1.1 Curriculum and 1.2 Pedagogy. 2. As per our most recent school Quality Review and IIT Review, our school needs to strengthen the comprehensive system that is used to provide actionable and timely feedback to students and so that students are able to reflect, track, and take ownership of their own learning. While we receive a Proficient in 2.2 Assessment on our most recent Quality Review, this was identified as our area of Focus as these practices are inconsistent in all four content areas and need to be widespread across the school. 3. The priority needs that will be addressed in the goal and action plan are that the school community should strengthen our assessment practices, ensuring that students are receiving timely, descriptive actionable feedback to scholars and 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 17  engage students in goal setting so that scholars will be able to communicate their current level or performance and make adjustments to improve. 4. The data trends that were analyzed are: School Quality Review (May 2018)   Two Principal Performance Observations (2017-2018 school year)  IIT Review Recommendations (October 2017) Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? Our school's instructional focus for 2018-19 is the following: If staff regularly provide timely, descriptive, actionable feedback to scholars on how they can grow, engage them in setting goals for what comes next, and teach them to track their progress, then scholars will be able to communicate their current level of performance (where they are now), their learning destination (where they are headed), and make adjustments to improve (by acting upon their next steps). Furthermore, our school core values, S.W.A.G., Student Ownership, Working Diligently, Accountability and Ownership, Growth Mindset, describe the academic and personal behaviors we have adopted as school communit y. Across all classrooms, teachers implement our Core 5 Instructional Priorities which include: 1. Framing the Lesson: Learning targets that are visible in all classrooms as well as “The 3Ws” for framing the current unit of study (What are we learning?, Why are we learning it?, Where is it leading?). Furthermore, S.W.A.G. targets are visible across classrooms as a way to reinforce our school core values. 2. Gradual Release of Responsibility: Use of a gradual release of responsibility model of instructional (I do, We do, You do together, You do It Alone). By using this approach, teachers are making the standards of high quality work clear to students by modeling high-performance responses. 3. Annotation & Accessing Complex Texts: Students utilize the “Rule of 3” for annotation of complex texts as a way to support students in accessing and understanding the text. Teachers integrate opportunities for student discussion, such as a turn and talk, as a way for students to communicate their understanding of the text. Independent Reading and Reading Intervention are also a core part of our instructional program. All students participate in 15 minutes of Independent Reading at the beginning of each ELA class. 4. Writing Everyday: Use of Hochman writing strategies are used across grade levels and content areas as a scaffold, which supports students in engaging in high-levels of thinking via writing. 5. Assessment & Feedback: Various formative assessment strategies, such as the Walk Around Look For, are utilized in classrooms as a way for teachers to assess student learning and make adjustments to instruction based on the data they collect. Teachers provide actionable, timely, feedback to students and opportunities for students to reflect and act upon this feedback. All professional development is informed by the school instructional focus and is regularly evaluated and adjusted by our Instructional Cabinet. The instructional cabinet, (composed of school leaders, teacher leaders and our 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 18  director of school renewal) meet weekly to conduct classroom walkthroughs, observe teacher practice, and student work in order to determine the impact of our professional learning on ensuring our Instructional Focus and Core 5 are visible across all classrooms. What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? Using Common Core aligned curriculum (EngageNY for ELA; CPM for Math; New Visions for Living Environment, Earth Science and Global History; and CUNY Debating U.S. History) and through weekly common planning time and weekly department meetings, teachers are collaborating to modify the curriculum to provide access to all learners. Teachers use common planning time to analyze data and student work to identify and address instructional gaps. Teachers provide common interim assessments to scholars four times each year. Data from the benchmarks are collected through Data Analysis Summary Sheets to record trends in student data, and document and plan instructional next steps in response to this data. To deepen student ownership of learning, at least once per marking period (three times a semester), teachers are engaging students in academic conferencing so that students understand their current levels of performance in the class and have opportunities to revise their work based on feedback from their teachers. Lead teachers engage in weekly departmental meeting and co-planning meetings which focus on the implementation of Common Core Learning Standards, Instructional Shifts and the revision of curriculum. Adjustments made to the curriculum are based on data from the Data Analysis Summary Sheets. What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? Scholars take a career-interest survey in 9th grade and complete a yearly Career Plan in advisory. All scholars in 9th grade will be programmed for a CTE course in Digital Literacy and in 10th grade have the option to choose from a Digital Communications or Law/Justice/Cybersecurity Major. For our Law/Justice major we will partner with the Justice Resource Center to implement comprehensive curriculum so that students are engaging in challenging law-related projects where they learn research, teamwork and critical thinking skills. Furthermore, all scholars will participate in Service Learning through our CBO organization, BuildOn with the goal of achieving at least 100 service hours over the course of 4 years. Scholars will also have the opportunity to take AP Literature and AP US History courses, as well as College Now courses through our partnerships with Monroe College, Hostos, and Bronx Community College. Through these opportunities, all students are developing the skills and habits to prepare them for both college and careers. In our ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science classes, the instructional shifts are evident through our use of CCLS aligned curriculum and assessment. Our teachers collaborate with coaches to ensure that units require scholars to be engaged in non-fictional text in ELA classes and in literacy across each content areas. Using interim assessment data, scholars read complex passages which include tiered vocabulary and supporting claims with textual evidence. In our Math classes, the instructional shifts are evident through our intensive focus on conceptual understanding while building fluency of basic math and modeling using the Gradual Release of Responsibility instructional framework. Interim assessment data guides instructional adjustments to reinforce specific skills and/or standards using strategic interventions to ensure mastery. Lead teachers engage in weekly departmental meeting and co-planning meetings which focus on the implementation of Common Core Learning Standards, Instructional Shifts and the revision of curriculum. Content coaches and an ENL coach are also on site at least once a week to provide individual feedback to teachers on understanding the CCLS, implementing the selected curriculum, and making modifications to the curriculum based on student needs. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 19  What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? The "Core 5" described earlier (Framing the Lesson, Gradual Release of Responsibility, Annotation & Accessing Complex Texts, Writing Everyday, and Assessment & Feedback) are the Instructional Priorities implemented so that all students are set up for success. Specifically, in the Gradual Release of Responsibility (GRR) is one of our Core 5 Instructional Priorities. In the GRR framework, teachers set the purpose for learning by eliciting how yesterday's lesson connects to today's lesson, providing clear expectations, rubrics, and using modeling techniques (I do) and/or demonstration for scholars through think-alouds to show (not tell) scholars what exemplary work looks like. Observers will notice teachers gradually releasing the responsibility to scholars by guiding them through the practice portion of the lesson (“We do”). During the “We do” portion of the lesson, scholars practice mastering a task while the teacher is modeling how to master the task. scholars then work together with their peers to complete a task (“You do it” together) and assess knowledge by checking each other’s work using a rubric. Classroom visits will reveal student goal-setting folders and teachers conferencing with scholars around their goals. At the beginning of a unit, clear expectations will be shared with scholars through the use of standards-based rubrics. An observer may notice scholars working in groups and/or independently using rubrics for self and peer assessment. Teachers circulate the room to conference with scholars around academic/career advisory goals or conferencing with groups of scholars to support them through providing actionable feedback. Teachers use formative assessment data to adjust lessons and curriculum. The use of online grading and progress monitoring tools, ie. Skedula, facilitates the Gradual Release of Responsibility framework by giving scholars and parents direct access to feedback that can be used to take ownership of their progress toward academic and career goals. Lessons are designed to incorporate opportunities for scholars to improve and revise their work based on actionable feedback on rubric criteria. Through a partnership with BlueEngine, 9th Grade Algebra and 10th Grade ELA classes will have 3 Blue Engine Teaching Assistants. These teams of three BETAs and one lead teacher work closely together to provide a more engaging and rigorous classroom experience. Teaching teams are trained and supported to execute various instructional models in a single classroom, addressing variations in student achievement, academic needs and learning styles through daily small group work and individualized teaching approaches to create a new kind of learning environment altogether. How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? As previously mentioned, at the culmination of each interim assessment, teachers utilize a Data Analysis Summary Sheets to record trends in student data, and document and plan instructional next steps in response to this data. On a daily basis, teachers use formative assessments to make adjustments to instruction for the following day and differentiate the levels of scaffolding provided to groups of students. A majority of our core-academic classrooms are co-taught by 2 teachers (General Education, ICT, ENL). In these classrooms, our teachers coordinate the adult-supports in the room to ensure access for all learners. Teachers receive professional learning on understanding the reading levels, IEP management needs, and ENL levels of our scholars. This data is shared with teachers early in the school year along with strategies for supporting the diverse needs of our scholars. As part of our distributive leadership structures, we have a Reading Specialist, Special Education Coordinator and ENL Coordinator who serve as resources for teachers and provide support in modifying tasks to meet individual student needs. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? Common assessments include the RAPID reading assessment and Hochman writing tasks. The results from the RAPID assessment are used to inform teacher selection of texts and help inform Friday What I Need (WIN) Days in ELA 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 20  classrooms, where students engage in small group targeted instruction in writing or literacy skills. The results from RAPID are also used to program our tiered reading intervention program. Students reading at a 3rd grade reading level or less receive small group reading intervention using the Orton Gillingham Approach. Students reading at a 4th-7th grade level receive small group reading intervention using REWARDS. In addition, the math department will also use iXL Math intervention program to formatively assess students fluency of the skills required by curriculum. On a daily basis, teachers use formative assessments to make adjustments to instruction for the following day and differentiate the levels of scaffolding provided to groups of students. A majority of our core-academic classrooms are co-taught by 2 teachers (General Education, ICT, ENL). In these classrooms, our teachers coordinate the adult-supports in the room to ensure access for all learners. Interim Assessments are administered four times a each in each content area. As previously mentioned, at the culmination of each assessment, teachers utilize a Data Analysis Summary Sheets are used to record trends in student data, and document and plan instructional next steps in response to this data. In addition, departmental teams utilize the Data Wise Improvement Process, an inquiry approach to help improve teaching and learning. Through this process, teachers analyze a variety of assessment data (Regents exams, formative assessments, student interviews, etc.) as well as teacher practice (lesson plans and classroom inter-visitations) in order to identify a Learner Centered Problem and a Problem of Practice, in other words identify a gap area related to student performance and teacher delivery of instruction. Departmental teams have selected an instructional strategy to target the identified gap area and administer common formative assessments to track student progress in the identified skill. Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) RAPID Assessment Diagnostic 9-12 Diagnostic na Benchmark iXL na Interim Assessments 4x a Year in all Content Areas Part 3 – Annual Goal 9-12 na 9-12 Determine students reading strengths and challenges to inform instructional groupings and intervention classes. Plan Tiered Reading Interventions. Determine students math fluency and skills gaps to inform instructional groupings in math classes. na Regents aligned assessments to determine student progress towards mastery of course standards. Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, through targeted efforts towards providing additional instructional supports and resources to Longwood Preparatory mathematics educators, there will be a 9% increase on the CC algebra regents, moving from a 56% pass rate by year 2 (2017-18) to a 65% pass rate by year 2 (2018-19) 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 21  Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Framework: Rigorous Instruction College and Career Preparatory Index Progress Towards Graduation Year 2 and 3 na 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 22  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. School Leaders, Teacher Leaders, FSC Coaches, and Consultants provide Professional Learning aligned to Instructional Focus and Core 5 Priorities, as well as Special Populations (ENLs and Students with Disabilities). Professional Learning through the support of Assessment Matters (Teaching Matters) will support LPA staff in our Instructioanl Focus. Whole Staff PD and direct support for school leaders and teacher leaders will center around practices that allow students to clearly understand and speak to the characteristics of high-quality work as defined by standards and clear learning targets. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Teachers All Benchmarks School Leaders, FSC Coaches, Teacher Leaders August 27th - August 31st, Every Monday during School Year, Chancellor's PD Days How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Instructional Leadership Team meets weekly to assess impact of professional learning on teacher practice, in particular, the practices aligned to our IF by reviewing data collected from classroom walkthroughs and through frequent analysis of feedback on student work from across the school. Interim assessments and Data Analysis Sheets are reviewed for progress. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 23  Common Planning Time 2x a Week Including DataWise Improvement Process Facilitated by Teacher Leaders Students, All Teachers All Benchmarks 2x each week School Leaders, Teacher Leaders na na na na na Partnership with Blue Engine providing ongoing support for Lead Teachers and Teaching Assistants Reading and Regents Intervention programs 9th and 10th Grade Students, Blue Engine Lead Teachers All students, all teachers Progress Towards Graduation Year 2 and 3 September 2018 and ongoing School Leaders, BlueEngine Lead Teachers, BlueEngine Coaches All Benchmarks September 2018 and ongoing School Leaders, IEP Teacher na na na na na 4b – Parent and Family Engagement DataWise Action Plan defines how teams will monitor the impact of instructional strategies on student learning and teacher practice. na Interim Assessment results of scholars in BlueEngine Classrooms. Monitoring of RAPID and PowerUp Results at beginning, mid and end of year. Regents results. na How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During Back to School Night on September 26th, each department team will provide resources for families (by content area) that provides an overview of the content and skills students learn over the course of four years at LPA and information on how to support students if they are struggling in a particular content area. Our IEP Teacher and ENL Coordinator will also provide specific resources and sample activities for families that help promote Independent Reading and improve literacy skills at home. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 24   FSC/Renewal coaches will provide support for teacher learning in how to prepare lessons and summative/formative assessments that are aligned to the Regents exams  Common Core aligned curricula and assessments will serve as a resource for instruction and assessment  Collaborative Teacher Team Meetings will be scheduled weekly   Per Session will be allocated for teachers and staff to run a Regents Prep program both after school and on Instructional Cabinet will meet weekly after school, including Peer Collaborative Teachers and Model teachers Saturdays  Budget allocations towards intervention and Regents prep programs including iXL, Castle Learning and RAPID/Power Up Reading Intervention  Professional Development Cycles will focus on implementation of our Instructional Focus, Core 5, and teacher learning needs as well as strategies for supporting ELL’s and SWD to be successful and receive college ready scores on the Regents Exams. Professional Development Consultants who specialize in assessment and English Language Learners will be contracted.  Coaching from FSC coaches and other consultants provide individualized coaching for teachers and school leaders around datawise inquiry. Teacher leaders new to leading DataWise will need more focused supports from these coaches.  Teachers attend Professional Learning through Justice Resource Center to implement CTE curriculum  Blue Engine will provide coaching support for BlueEngine classroom Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG or SIF Grant 21st Century School Success Grant X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. At the end of each marking period, the school leadership team will use data from the SDC marking period (MP) grade analyzer to track student performance. The MP analyzer check-ins will occur on the following dates: 10/25/18, 12/4/18, 1/31/19, 3/19/19, & 5/7/19. Additionally, February 2019, Rigorous Instruction at Longwood Preparatory Academy will be evident through the implementation of common core Math curricula from EngageNY and CPM which will result in Math (by year 2) Regents pass of at least 40%.  By February 2019, teachers will have administered and analyzed two Interim Assessments (October and January) to determine student progress towards passing Regents exam and make appropriate adjustments to curriculum.  By February 2019, departmental inquiry teams will share their findings from the first cycle of inquiry and the Act and Assess phase of DataWise in order to inform both schoolwide and department specific adjustments to instruction.  By February 2019, we will review assessment data, Regents data, individual student Credit Accumulation and Scholarship Reports to ensure that progress is being made towards the June 2019 goals for student progress and performance on the Math Regents exams, as well as College and Career Readiness and Progress Towards Graduation. Schools leaders and will conduct frequent cycles of classroom observations and analysis of student tasks (specifically feedback on student work) and benchmark data to monitor teacher and student progress.  2017-18 RSCEP-ON 25   Instructional cabinet will conduct frequent cycles of classroom observations and analysis of student tasks (specifically feedback on student work) and benchmark data in order to inform and adjust professional learning for teachers. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. January 2019 Regents results  Advance observation reports, data from non-evaluative walkthroughs with teacher leaders   October 2018 and January 2019 interim assessment data  Credit accumulation data using New Visions sorter Part 6c. In February 2018, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review)? 1. Our advisory program, weekly kid talk meetings, and our new student intake process are three of our strongest practices we have in place aligned to this element of the framework. On our two most recent Quality Reviews, we received a Well Developed in 1.4 Supportive Learning Environment. 2. As per our most recent school Quality Review and IIT Review, our school needs to strengthen the comprehensive system that is used to monitor and track the impact of our social emotional and enrichment initiatives. Our most recent IIT Review recommended that we develop an evidence based evaluation system to monitor the effectiveness and impact of the schools social emotional health initiatives and partnerships. While we received a Proficient in 3.4 of our most recent Quality Review, we are continuing to focus on establishing high expectations for all students, including our high-needs subgroups and ensuring families are involved in this process. 3. The priority needs that will be addressed in the goal and action plan are that the student support staff, work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. 4. We have many practices in place to ensure we are supporting the whole child. These include: bi-weekly attendance team meetings, advisory program for all students, Peer Group Connections peer mentoring program, SWAG mentors for severely chronically absent students, and weekly kid talk meetings with instructional staff. These and other initiatives are further outlined in the Summative Vision for Supportive Environment. 5. The data trends that were analyzed are: 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 27    School Quality Review (May 2018) IIT Review Recommendations (October 2017) Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? Longwood Preparatory Academy’s vision for a supportive school environment is to establish a classroom and school culture where scholars feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. To fulfill this vision, Center for Supportive Schools (CSS), our lead Community School partner, is working closely with us to plan, implement, progress monitor, assess and make adjustments if necessary to our supportive environment initiatives. Our primary goals are to develop a common understanding of what a safe school environment that promotes student ownerships, fosters effective communication among all stakeholders and develops scholar’s safe personal and academic behaviors; to continue to provide social and emotional developmental health programs to address students’ social and emotional needs and teach them to have a growth mindset; to develop a shared vision to create a sense of ownership for stakeholders; collect and assess evidence of student progress to track and reflect on our process for creating a supportive environment. CSS is new to our school community this year, and through their partnership and expertise in data monitoring, we anticipate we will more effectively be able to monitor the impact of all social emotional and enrichment initiatives at LPA. The following outlines key initiatives for a supportive environment in partnership with our CBO. Achievement Mentoring training will be a new service provided to our school this year through our partnership with CSS. Achievement Mentoring is an intervention program that equips teachers and staff with skills to support students in realizing that their actions can bring about desired consequences and reinforces this belief by eliciting participation from teachers, parents, and other significant adults in the student’s life. The focus of these trainings will be for teachers and staff who serve as mentors for chronically absent students, however all teachers will receive training in becoming achievement mentors as the skills learned can be transferred to classroom conferences with students. Peer Group Connection (PGC) is a peer mentoring program provided by Center for Supportive Schools that pairs 12th and 11th grade scholars who have completed leadership training with incoming 9th grade scholars to teach and demonstrate a leadership curriculum that focuses on character development, the transition from middle school, and improved communication and decision-making skills. Achieve Now Academy (ANA). In October 2017, LPA was awarded a grant from the Office of Safety and Youth Development to design and implement a program to provide over-age and under-credited scholars additional time, guidance, and support so that they accumulate missing credits, receive Regents prep, and participate in enrichment activities on Saturdays. We anticipate receiving this grant for the 2018-2019 school year and supplementing the program with our budget. SWAG is an acronym created by the school community stakeholders to represent the school’s core values. It stands for Scholarly conduct, Working diligently, Accountability and ownership of learning, and Growth Mindset. SWAG is a motivational program that promotes positive social behavior by awarding scholars SWAG Points by demonstrating the core values and performing citizenship duties. SWAG values are visually represented and invoked regularly. Class Dojo points are good for field trips, achievement celebrations, and to shop at the school store. A subset of SWAG is our SWAG Success Mentoring program assigns severely chronically absent students a mentor in the building. Center for Supportive 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 28  Schools provides professional development and support for mentors through their Achievement Mentoring initiative so that our SWAG mentors can have a greater impact. All students at LPA participate in advisory classes twice a week, where teachers and CBO staff provide all scholars with the support they need to feel attached to the school, to succeed in school, and to graduate ready for the rigors of college and high-quality careers. Through Advisory classes scholars and their families come to know and are known well by at least one adult in the school who provides continuity of care by staying connected with them throughout the entire time they are enrolled in the school. All advisory lessons support one of the four areas: Community Building, College & Career Readiness, Academic Achievement and Social Emotional Awareness. Through a partnership with Good Shepherd, we have a Student Success Center on site where a College Counselors and youth leaders provide resources and support for students in families in navigating the college application process. Youth leaders participate in a rigorous training program and lead workshops for parents and students around financial aid, applying to college, preparing for college, scholarships, preparing for SATS, etc. Student Success Center in collaboration with school counselor also organizes partnerships with Hostos, BCC, and Monroe College to enroll 11th and 12th grade students in College Now classes for college credit. SSC also organizes college fairs, college trips and career day for the entire school community. LPA has two recording studios on site that students have access to during their CTE courses as well as through after-school programs. In partnership with CBO Educational Alchemy, students may engage in Hip Hop therapy afterschool as a place to write and record music as an outlet and therapeutic experience for our scholars. The National Honors Society (NHS) recognizes scholars who excel in academics, leadership, service and character, and encourages participation in school activities and community service. This year, our school joined the NHS to recognize our honor roll scholars and provide incentives for excellence. Student Government is one of the ways in which we wish to increase student involvement in the decisions of the school and their experience during their tenure. The goal of the student government is to provide an improved sense of community by allowing scholars to plan and carry out recognition celebrations for scholars and families. The Student Government is organized by the Director of School Culture. Kid Talk is our student referral process, which consists of weekly conversations between the scholars and schools counselors to assess academic and social emotional needs. The purpose of kid-talk meeting is to provide targeted intervention to specific scholar(s) in a particular grade as a team. The primary goal is to understand what academic and/or behavior strategies are working with the student(s) in one class and determine ways to duplicate that success in other classes. As a grade team, teachers and counselors decide which strategies will be used for two weeks in each classroom and track the scholar(s) success and challenges with the intervention. At the next kid-talk meeting, the team use anecdotals from Skedula and/or class assignment as system for tracking and discussing if the strategy was a success and/or if there were some challenges. The team decides to either continue providing the intervention or strategy to the student or modify how the intervention is provided. The counselors are responsible for tracking and monitoring the interventions after the two-weeks of implementation. Our parent coordinator and school support team makes daily morning and afternoon phone calls to the homes of scholars who did not attend school or have been chronically absent. In addition, 1st period attendance is collected during the first 15 minutes of class and phone calls are made immediately to inform parents that their child is not in school. The social worker and attendance teacher conduct Home Visits on a case by case basis when we are unable to reach scholars or caregivers by phone and the situation requires that direct contact with a student’s family is made. BuildOn is an international community based organization that provides our scholars with service learning opportunities and the opportunity to travel abroad to help build a school in a foreign country such as Nepal, Haiti, and Nicaragua. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 29  The Summer Bridge Program is a NYC DOE Community Schools initiative to help incoming scholars with the transition from middle school to high school using academic classes and a curriculum devoted to building organizational and leadership skills. We will track the effectiveness of these initiatives and our progress toward a minimum graduation rate of 65% and minimum yearly attendance rate of 85% by using student attendance data, report card data, credit accumulation rates, graduation rates, and the Learning Environment Survey. This monitoring will occur monthly to evaluate the evidence of impact of the various initiatives occurring at the school. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner The Center for Supportive Schools Good Shepherds Services CBO Focus Organize and lead all Social Emotional Initiatives and Supports at our school. Coordinate other CBOs partnerships at our School. CSS is new to our school community this year, and through their partnership and expertise in data monitoring, we anticipate we will more effectively be able to monitor the impact of all social emotional and enrichment initiatives at LPA. College Access - College Counselor and youth leaders provide resources and support for students in families in navigating the college application process. Youth leaders participate in a rigorous training program and lead workshops for parents and students around financial aid, applying to college, preparing for college, scholarships, preparing for SATS, etc. How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? In collaboration, our Parent Coordinator and Community School director, monthly calendars, monthly newsletter are prepared and distributed to families. They also leverage other community organizations to prepare workshops and information sessions in areas of interest to our families. For example, Good Shepherd/Student Success Center provides parent support around the college application and financial aid process. Parent Association minutes are also posted on our website for families who were unable to attend and all communication is translated in the primary language of the parent. Families are also invited to college events and college trips to engage alongside their child in preparing for college. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, the school partnered with Center for Supportive Schools to empower students across the school, cultivating a supportive environment in which students feel safe, supported, engaged, and inspired as evidenced by an average daily attendance rate of at least 85%, which represents a 3.5% increase from 2017-2018. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 30 List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Attendance 4 Year Graduation Rate Learning Environment Survey 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 31 How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Reduction in Chronic Absenteeism and scholarship Scholarship Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) 9th grade students, Attendance September 2018-June 2019 School leaders, CBO, teachers 9th, 11th and 12th grade students Graduation rate September 2018- June 2019 School leaders, CBO, Programmer, Teachers Advisory and Peer Group Connection Professional Learning for Staff and Students  Establish weekly peer outreach groups between junior and senior peer leaders meeting with small groups of freshmen  PD for school faculty who will teach the leadership courses  Program 11th and 12th grade peer leaders in a daily, for-credit, year-long leadership course na na na na na na na na na na na na Maintain partnerships with Build-On, and Morris Heights Clinic Increase student involvement on the School Leadership Team Students Attendance Ongoing CBO, School leaders Attendance Students Attendance September 2017 - June 2018 School leaders Attendance 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 32  Program all students for an Advisory course Students Attendance Students Attendance September 2017 - June 2018 Ongoing Programmer, School leaders Attendance School leaders, CBO, Guidance Counselors, Teachers Attendance and scholarship Establish incentives for students’ progress toward attendance, academic and social growth that can be redeemed for school merchandise, including: 1. AM and PM structures at the beginning and end of each school day 2 .Bi-weekly student raffles with prizes for students with less than three days of unexcused absences 3. Monthly perfect attendance breakfast or pizza parties 4. Incentive trips for students with perfect attendance for each term Entering into the attendance challenge with the organization “Get Schooled” to increase school-wide attendance Establish a School Culture Team that includes representation from teachers, CBO partners, Dean of School Culture and guidance staff for key goals of: 1. increasing student attendance 2. reducing the number and severity of student incidents 3. developing a student culture with the Habits of Students Graduation rate Ongoing School leaders, CBO, Guidance Counselors, Teachers Scholarship 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 33  Mind that lead to success The School Culture Team measures the success of efforts to support student social and emotional development using three data sets: 1. Student attendance 2. Student discipline data 3. 7 Habits of Highly Effective Kids Survey Data 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. During Back to School Night on September 26th and New Student Orientation on August 15th, our Center for Supportive Schools will inform families of the various social emotional, health and extra-curriculuar opportunities available to our scholars. The CSD and CBO team will participate in monthly SLT meetings and PA meetings to inform parents of the monthly events occurring at the school. CBO team will assist Parent Coordinator in outreach to involve parents in these events. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  All teachers will be programmed for a weekly Kid Talk meeting organized by grade level  Advisory Leadership team will meet monthly afterschool to plan lessons for each cycle of the advisory  curriculum Lead CBO (Center for Supportive Schools) provide training for PGC and Achievement Mentors (SWAG Mentors) Lead CBO organizes all partnerships with other CBOs including buildOn and Educational Alchemy   Training for PGC leaders, PGC teacher and SSC youth leaders  Director of School Culture will have at least 3 periods a week to focus on responsibilities related to advisory curriculum, achieve now academy, and ensure collaboration with SSC Program Coordinator, CSD, and school counselors  Teacher recruitment for ANA Saturday Academy Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X P/F Set-aside 21st Century 2017-18 RSCEP-ON X C4E 34  X Title I 1003(a) Title III X PTA Funded SIG or SIF Grant School Success Grant Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Weekly attendance meetings with success mentors, CBO, guidance etc. to address chronic absenteeism as well as students trends requiring intervention. Quarterly Attendance Team Strategic Data Conferences with the New Visions Sorter will allow for regular analysis of intervention impact on cohorts as well as targeted populations to make course corrections. These will also serve as opportunities for regular comparative analysis of attendance trends from 2017-18 ytd vs 2018-19 ytd. By February 2019, the school and its CBO partners will cultivate a supportive environment in which students feel safe, supported and challenged as evidenced by an average daily attendance rate of at least 84%. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. New Vision Sorter and Heat Map Official attendance reported in ATS Part 6c. In February 2018, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 35  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: x SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 1. Teacher collaboration in our school yields coherent instructional practices across classrooms that reflects a consistent set of beliefs about how students learn best. Teacher teams utilize the DataWise improvement process to engage in inquiry around student learning and teacher practice. Teacher leaders meet with school leaders at least three times a month to share out progress of departmental level inquiry and collaboratively make decisions about resources and supplies needed, professional development, and programming. On our most recent Quality Review, we received a Well Developed in 4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership Development. 2. Based on feedback from the our most recent IIT, it was recommended that we develop a plan to further develop teacher capacity by identifying staff members who implement best practices and plan a series of focused learning walks so that teachers can identify strategies they can replicate in their practice. As we strive towards having a State Approved CTE approved program at our school, we also need to strategically integrate opportunities for teachers to collaborate across content areas to plan integrated units of study so that CTE coursework is viewed as an integral part of our school. 3. The priority needs that will be addressed are that the school should further teacher collaboration to create coherence across the school, particularly between our CTE classes and core content classes. Through learning walks, professional learning, and planning time, teachers will learn how to plan integrated units of study so that students can connect their learning across disciplines. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 36  4. The data trends that were analyzed are:   School Quality Review (May 2018) IIT Review (October 2017) Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? Teachers will meet three times a week by content area in which 2 are dedicated to common planning time and one is dedicated to departmental inquiry. Departmental teams utilize the Data Wise Improvement Process, an inquiry approach to help improve teaching and learning. Through this process, teachers analyze a variety of assessment data (Regents exams, formative assessments, student interviews, etc.) as well as teacher practice (lesson plans and classroom inter-visitations) in order to identify a Learner Centered Problem and a Problem of Practice, in other words identify a gap area related to student performance and teacher delivery of instruction. Departmental teams then select an instructional strategy to target the identified gap area and administer common formative assessments to track student progress in the identified skill. During common planning time, teachers plan curriculum, analyze student assessments, and use the results from daily assessments as well as the Data Analysis Summary Sheets to make adjustments to their lessons. Furthermore, student data, including ENL proficiency levels, IEP management needs, reading levels, and Regents scores are available to all teachers to inform their planning of supports for individual students. For the 2018-2019 school year, we have been accepted into the Learning Partners Program with a focus area of Teacher Collaboration. The focus of our teacher teams will be lesson studies in each department. Using our identified student-center problem of practice, departmental teams will engage in lesson studies as inter-visitations. All teacher teams, including department teams, school counselor meetings, attendance teams, parent outreach teams, and kid talk, have a designated facilitator, who creates an agenda for each meeting and meeting minutes are documented. These agendas and meeting minutes are reviewed by school leaders and teacher team facilitators to help monitor the use of teacher-team time and ensure next-steps are being implemented. All professional development is informed by the school’s instructional focus and Core 5, and is regularly evaluated and adjusted based on regular classroom walkthroughs and feedback from the instructional cabinet. Professional Learning at the beginning of the school year focuses on developing a normed understanding of our Core 5 Instructional Priorities and school goals, as well as equipping teachers with strategies and data to know our students, especially our Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners. Based on evaluative and non-evaluative teacher observations, cycles of professional learning are planned focused In collaboration with school leaders, teachers self-select an area of focus such as strategies for English Language Learners, ICT practices, Questioning & Discussion, CTE Integration, etc. These groups are then used to plan monthly learning walks where teachers take turns hosting their colleagues to observe practices in the focus area. As a Learning Walk Cohort, teachers support one another in improving their practice. How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? The school's instructional cabinet is comprised of peer collaborative teachers (PCTs) who work as the "leads" in their content teams. Teacher leaders meet with school leaders weekly to share out progress of departmental level inquiry and collaboratively make decisions about resources and supplies needed, professional development, and programming. PCTs also design and facilitate professional learning experiences during Professional Development on Mondays. The instructional cabinet, (composed of school leaders, teacher leaders and our director of school renewal) 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 37  meet weekly to conduct classroom walkthroughs, observe teacher practice, and student work in order to determine the impact of our professional learning on ensuring our Instructional Focus and Core 5 are visible across all classrooms. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Departmental teams utilize the Data Wise Improvement Process, an inquiry approach to help improve teaching and learning. Through this process, teachers analyze a variety of assessment data (Regents exams, formative assessments, student interviews, etc.) as well as teacher practice (lesson plans and classroom inter-visitations) in order to identify a Learner Centered Problem and a Problem of Practice, in other words identify a gap area related to student performance and teacher delivery of instruction. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? The instructional cabinet, (composed of school leaders, teacher leaders and our director of school renewal) meet weekly to share out their findings, successes and challenges of engaging in DataWise. Leads will also norm and align protocols, skills, and task templates to ensure consistency across content areas and grade levels with the aim of adopting common instructional strategies school-wide. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Data Reviewed Teacher Practice - Teacher Feedback on Student Work Teacher Practice - Data and low inference notes from classroom walkthroughs Intent Instructional cabinet will regularly review teacher feedback on student work and student next steps to inform the professional learning needed for our school community. The purpose of reviewing teacher feedback is aligned to our instructional focus: If staff regularly provide timely, descriptive, actionable feedback to scholars on how they can grow, engage them in setting goals for what comes next, and teach them to track their progress, then scholars will be able to communicate their current level of performance (where they are now), their learning destination (where they are headed), and make adjustments to improve (by acting upon their next steps). All professional development is informed by the school’s instructional focus and Core 5, and is regularly evaluated and adjusted based on regular classroom walkthroughs and feedback from the instructional cabinet. Interim Assessments 4x a Year in all Content Areas, Data Analysis Sheets Teachers use assessment results to determine instructional next steps which are recorded on Data Analysis Sheets. The instructional cabinet reviews the data analysis sheets that are completed by teachers to identify trends and areas of support that are needed across the school. na na Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 38  By June 2019, teachers will engage in an inquiry-based collaboration that utilizes assessment data to provide greater opportunities for goal setting, action planning and reflection for scholars and their families, resulting in a four-year graduation rate that meets or exceeds 70% Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Collaborative Teachers 4-Year Graduation Rate Rigorous Instruction 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 39  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Teacher Common Planning Meetings - Prioritizing Programming for Content (3x a week) and Grade Level Teams (2x a week). Department leaders facilitate DataWise improvement process. Scholars will be engaged in reflective practices that will enable them to track their progress, communicate their courses’ core competencies, identify their current level of performance, and know what they need to do to improve . Instructional Cabinet - meet weekly to conduct walkthroughs and review teacher practice artifacts to inform professional learning Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers, Teacher leaders Collaborative Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 School Leaders, Programmer, Teacher Leaders All scholars Feedback lesson and data analysis after each interim assessment October 2018-May 2019 School Leaders, Teacher Leaders How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Meeting Agendas, DataWise Action Plan Review of feedback trackers, collection of scholar exams and data analysis sheets Review of teacher artifacts, classroom walkthroughs, All teachers, Teacher leaders Collaborative Teachers August 2018 School Leaders, Teacher Leaders (initial meeting) Once a week September 2018 - June 2019. November 2018-June 2019 Achievement Mentoring Attendance All SWAG mentors (instructional School leaders and Center for Supportive Schools Increase in student attendance 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 40  & support staff) 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In collaboration with our CBO, Center for Supportive Schools, LPA we will facilitate a Parent Leadership training and Education and employment resources for families. Using parent teacher conferences, by appointments, curriculum nights and showcasing scholar projects will also enable our community to continuously promote teacher-parent/family collaborations. Our goal is: By June 2019, at at least 25% of families will be engaged in a school event, parent leadership support, and/or connected with family resources. CSS in conjunction with our Parent Coordinator will be responsible for implementation and oversight. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The following resources will be leveraged to achieve the goal:  Teachers’ programs will be scheduled to ensure time for teacher teams, dedicated blocks of professional learning sessions per week, and student progress monitoring meeting  ORS coaches will provide support for teacher learning and planning beginning in August 2018  Common Core aligned curricula and assessments will serve as a resource for instruction and assessment  Collaborative Teacher Team Meetings and Protocols will be scheduled weekly  Professional Development Cycles will focus on teacher learning needs  Professional Learning Committee (Instructional Cabinet) will meet regularly to collaboratively guide the instructional and professional learning programs Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG or SIF Grant 21st Century School Success Grant C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, school leaders will monitor progress towards graduation using Semester 1 credit accumulation and January Regents results to determine if the school is on a course to meet the annual goal of at least 67% graduation rate. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 41  Quarterly marking period Strategic Data conversations will be utilized to analyze marking period trends thus, in addition to interim assessment data, allow the school to reflect and make action plan adjustments. Senior advisor/advisee quarterly review of report cards will be utilized to reflect on goals and make collaborative decisions around academic interventions Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. New Visions Portal - Marking Period Reports / Scholarship Reports Part 6c. In February 2018, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 42  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 x 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The schools strength is creating a positive learning environment. The needs of the school is a focus on assessment The priority need, to be addressed, is using programmatic and human resources. The data for assessment was provided in the school's most recent quality review Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? The school leader will demonstrate effective distributive leadership and shared decision-making by presenting community-related concerns to staff, including the CBOs, and eliciting solutions and/or feedback from stakeholders. The school leader will solicit proposals for new programs and initiatives to improve the school community. The approved 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 43  school proposals will be communicated with the CBOs and the implementation of the proposals will be monitored to assure their effectiveness. School leaders will create an atmosphere of professional learning amongst staff via consistent communication and collaboration. School leaders will provide actionable feedback and concrete next steps as a means of support to help instructional staff. School leaders will act to reinforce the belief that all conversations should reflect high expectations for learning and growth. The belief that all students can learn by using a ‘no excuses model’ to hold our students to the highest level- regardless of their disability, language, or home life should be demonstrated. School leaders should infuse the community with the philosophy that good intentions are the norm, not the exception. School leaders and CBOs should consistently use a ‘Growth Mindset’, not a ‘Fixed Mindset’. School leaders should strive to develop a culture of collegial and professional relationships amongst staff; focusing specifically on critical reflection, shared accountability, and continuous professional development by ongoing reflection, shared accountability and participation in professional development. School leaders will build staff capacity to improve its pedagogical performance by expanding their skill sets to fulfill the school’s stated mission. School leadership will train and support staff to consistently refer to data sources to inform all decisions at Longwood Preparatory Academy. School leaders also will share data with CBOs to inform their decisions about community and student engagement. School leaders will strive to establish strong, effective partnerships with parents and CBOs by regularly communicating with parents and inviting them to be active and involved with their child’s education.  All members of the school community will provide its CBOs with feedback on the community needs and ideas on how to meet them. School leaders will create systems to nurture a strong community and school culture to achieve school goals.  What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? What would those collaborations look like?  The Community School Director (CSD) will collaborate with school leaders to track progress towards specific benchmarks aligned to the school’s vision. The CSD and the school leaders will monitor student attendance, academic progress, positive behavior and school culture referrals.  All school community members will meet in weekly “kid-talk” meetings using specific protocols to discuss interventions and/or strategies to reengage students and monitor their individual progress.  Teachers will receive regularly scheduled professional development on curriculum, instruction and assessment.  School leaders will support this professional development by regularly visiting classrooms on an informal and formal basis to offer developmental and evaluative feedback. School leaders will also engage in cycles of inquiry around teaching practice (Cabinet Inquiry). In conjunction with the Director of School Renewal, school leaders will engage in looking at ADVANCE data from the previous year as a baseline to determine which component in the Danielson Framework teachers struggled with the most. An area of focus will be selected to conduct cycles of inquiry and track teacher progress in the area of focus, using tennis charts with clearly defined sub-skills, as agreed upon interventions and supports are provided. Cabinet Inquiry meetings will occur at a minimum bi-weekly at an agreed upon time. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 44   The school leader will collaborate with external consultants, CBOs, ORS coaches, peer collaborative teachers and lead teachers. Bi-monthly meeting with these stakeholders will be used to analyze student attendance data, examine student work, and create targeted action plans for students based on their needs. How would the leader organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? Students programs will be constructed in such a way that meets the requirements for graduation within 4 years and offers rigorous courses that ensures students are college and/or career ready. Teacher schedules will reflect an 80 minute professional development day each week. These professional development days allow teachers to discuss various pedagogical techniques, assessment variations, lesson/unit planning with instructional strategies and specific supports for students with disabilities and ELLs. With an adequate and appropriate fiscal budget that is aligned and supportive of the RSCEP goals and funding support from our CBOs. What approach would the school leader have to conducting observations? How would he/she ensure that teachers are provided accurate, timely, and actionable feedback coupled with the support to implement the feedback? The school leadership will conduct informal and formal observations throughout the school year to develop and evaluate instructional staff using the following methodology: ● School leaders will conduct initial planning conferences (IPC) during September to determine the observation format ● School leaders will create an observational cycle to meet the IPC agreement to gain a fair and objective profile of the instructional staff ● School leaders will offer timely and objective feedback to aide in the development of the instructional staff ● School leaders will maintain an open-minded attitude in entertaining honest difference of opinion with observation notes ● School leaders will provide actionable feedback and concrete next steps to teachers after each observation How will the school support a shared accountability? What systems will be developed to share academic, behavior, Social Emotional Learning (SEL), and attendance data with partners so that strategies can be created and assessed to support growth? Shared accountability will be supported by the collaboration of SLT members, which consists of representatives of all constituents in school community. The following steps will be taken in developing shared accountability:  Development of a shared vision for student success that is aligned with the framework for great schools.  Alignment of the school vision with all partners 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 45  Development of clear systems for collecting, analyzing and sharing data with all constituents  Creation of a sustainable system to support student learning and academic success. This system will include a cycle of implementation, benchmarks, progress monitoring, and next steps. School leaders will ensure shared accountability by conducting regularly scheduled meeting with Assistant Principals, CBOs and community partners. School leaders will create a strategic plan which includes the RSCEP goals, stakeholders who are responsible for helping the school achieve their goals, the action plan and the intended results All students, parents and teachers will be provided with a handbook on the attendance, academic, behavioral, and social emotional expectations at Longwood Preparatory Academy. The handbooks will include specific guidelines on how and/or when a child will need support from the School Culture Team, attendance policy (including incentives and consequences), CBO support and how/when to use Restorative Practices. Implementation of these guidelines will be monitored and supported by school leaders. What and how will the leader delegate to assistant principals and the community school director? A distributive leadership model with systems of accountability will be used. The Community School Director and the Assistant Principal areas of supervision will be determined based on the school community needs, and areas of expertise. The school leader will specifically delegate the following to the Assistant Principal : ● Teacher evaluations ● Professional learning teams ● Supervision of the school culture team ● Supervision of a particular content area or grade ● Various administrative tasks The Community School Director will work with all CBO’s to ensure that they are an integral part of the school community, collaborating to plan activities that support the academic program, attendance initiatives, social- emotional development, leadership and promote overall student success. Additionally, the Community School Director will oversee the ELT program, health/vision screenings, Saturday Academy and any other expanded or extended learning opportunity in and outside of the school. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 46  On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? Building Teacher Capacity What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? Professional learning internally and externally What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? Shared decision making and building teacher capacity for distributive leadership How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? Attendance monthly PTA meeting and offer breakfast with the principal quarterly How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy 5 days per week within 5 school days of the observation 100% What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Advance Scholarship reports Cabinet Inquiry Team School administration AP, DSR, coaches AP, Principal and CBO How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? Students are provided with opportunities for remediation and enrichment during the school day and after school. Teachers programs will be designed to promote individualized support Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 47  In order to improve teacher practice across the school, by June 2019, the school culture team along with the school’s leadership team and the center for supportive schools will plan and implement targeted and differentiated professional learning opportunities for all teachers resulting in an increase in teacher satisfaction on the school survey question “adults at their school teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior (by focusing their attention, controlling their emotions, or managing their thinking, behavior, and feelings" moving from 61% (2017-18) to 68% (2018-19). Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Attendance Rigorous instruction Regents completion 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 48  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Attendance Teachers Regents completion September 2017 - June 2018 Principal Assistant Principals Composite Observations 4b – Parent and Family Engagement 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 49 Attendance Sept 2017-June 2018 CBO w/support of the School Leader Attendance Attendance Sept 2017-June 2018 CBO w/support of the School Leader Attendance Sept 2017-June 2018 Advisory leadership team, external consultant Attendance Principal Rigorous instruction Assistant Principal na September 2017 - June 2018 na DSR Principal na Observations Peer Group Connections (PGC) Student Family Advisory Advisory Selected 9th and 12th grade students All 9-12 students and parents 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th grade students not in PGC na na na School leaders will engage in cycles of inquiry around teaching practice (Cabinet Inquiry) using the Danielson Framework for Teaching to inform professional development and teacher feedback Conduct frequent cycles of observation using the Danielson Framework to provide teachers with actionable and timely feedback  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through the use of monthly parent newsletters in the languages of our parents and PA minutes-both of which will be posted online, school leadership will promote a culture for learning including ways to talk to their child about reading at home, resources for studying, homework help, and technical assistance with google classroom. Weekly calls will be made by parent volunteers to other parents to encourage school involvement and feedback on how to improve our parent participation in the school. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Engaging Schools Consultant for assistance with developing Advisory curriculum and maintaining a positive learning environment  Per session for teachers and programmer to fully implement a data team and track data  Per session for teachers and advisers to conduct a breakfast study before school begins Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG or SIF Grant 21st Century School Success Grant C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Quarterly reflections & Surveys on the effectiveness of professional development offerings will be reviewed. Inter-visitations will be conducted, allowing for teachers to observe ways in which curriculum is being both delivered and received, thus allowing for reflective conversations that spark adjustments where necessary. By February 2019, 60% of teachers will be rated effective or highly-effective in Danielson 3b, 3c and 3d Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Foundations for Success Tool Advance Part 6c. In February 2018, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 50  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The school's strength is effective planning and reciprocal communication. The needs of the school is providing training to promote student success This was evidence by the school's most recent quality review The priority need is school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? The school leader will demonstrate effective distributive leadership and shared decision-making by presenting community-related concerns to staff, including the CBOs, and eliciting solutions and/or feedback from stakeholders. The school leader will solicit proposals for new programs and initiatives to improve the school community. The approved 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 51  school proposals will be communicated with the CBOs and the implementation of the proposals will be monitored to assure their effectiveness. School leaders will create an atmosphere of professional learning amongst staff via consistent communication and collaboration. School leaders will provide actionable feedback and concrete next steps as a means of support to help instructional staff. School leaders will act to reinforce the belief that all conversations should reflect high expectations for learning and growth. The belief that all scholars can learn by using a ‘no excuses model’ to hold our scholars to the highest level- regardless of their disability, language, or home life should be demonstrated. School leaders should infuse the community with the philosophy that good intentions are the norm, not the exception. School leaders and CBOs should consistently use a ‘Growth Mindset’, not a ‘Fixed Mindset’. School leaders should strive to develop a culture of collegial and professional relationships amongst staff; focusing specifically on critical reflection, shared accountability, and continuous professional development by ongoing reflection, shared accountability and participation in professional development. School leaders will build staff capacity to improve its pedagogical performance by expanding their skill sets to fulfill the school’s stated mission. School leadership will train and support staff to consistently refer to data sources to inform all decisions at LPA. School leaders also will share data with CBOs to inform their decisions about community and student engagement. School leaders will strive to establish strong, effective partnerships with parents and CBOs by regularly communicating with parents and inviting them to be active and involved with their child’s education.  All members of the school community will provide its CBOs with feedback on the community needs and ideas on how to meet them. School leaders will create systems to nurture a strong community and school culture to achieve school goals.  What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? What would those collaborations look like?  The Community School Director (CSD) will collaborate with school leaders to track progress towards specific benchmarks aligned to the school’s vision. The CSD and the school leaders will monitor student attendance, academic progress, positive behavior and school culture referrals.  All school community members will meet in weekly “kid-talk” meetings using specific protocols to discuss interventions and/or strategies to reengage scholars and monitor their individual progress.  Teachers will receive regularly scheduled professional development on curriculum, instruction and assessment.  School leaders will support this professional development by regularly visiting classrooms on an informal and formal basis to offer developmental and evaluative feedback. School leaders will also engage in cycles of inquiry around teaching practice (Cabinet Inquiry). In conjunction with the Director of School Renewal, school leaders will engage in looking at ADVANCE data from the previous year as a baseline to determine which component in the Danielson Framework teachers struggled with the most. An area of focus will be selected to conduct cycles of inquiry and track teacher progress in the area of focus, using tennis charts with clearly defined sub-skills, as agreed upon interventions and supports are provided. Cabinet Inquiry meetings will occur at a minimum bi-weekly at an agreed upon time. Peer collaborative and model teachers will also  The school leader will collaborate with external consultants, CBOs, ORS coaches, peer collaborative teachers and lead teachers. Bi-monthly meeting with these stakeholders will be used to analyze student attendance data, examine student work, and create targeted action plans for scholars based on their needs. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 52  How would the leader organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? scholars programs will be constructed in such a way that meets the requirements for graduation within 4 years and offers rigorous courses that ensures scholars are college and/or career ready. Teacher schedules will reflect an 80 minute professional development day each week. These professional development days allow teachers to discuss various pedagogical techniques, assessment variations, lesson/unit planning with instructional strategies and specific supports for scholars with disabilities and ELLs. With an adequate and appropriate fiscal budget that is aligned and supportive of the RSCEP goals and funding support from our CBOs. What approach would the school leader have to conducting observations? How would he/she ensure that teachers are provided accurate, timely, and actionable feedback coupled with the support to implement the feedback? The school leadership will conduct informal and formal observations throughout the school year to develop and evaluate instructional staff using the following methodology: ● School leaders will conduct initial planning conferences (IPC) during September to determine the observation format ● School leaders will create an observational cycle to meet the IPC agreement to gain a fair and objective profile of the instructional staff ● School leaders will offer timely and objective feedback to aide in the development of the instructional staff ● School leaders will maintain an open-minded attitude in entertaining honest difference of opinion with observation notes ● School leaders will provide actionable feedback and concrete next steps to teachers after each observation How will the school support a shared accountability? What systems will be developed to share academic, behavior, Social Emotional Learning (SEL), and attendance data with partners so that strategies can be created and assessed to support growth? Shared accountability will be supported by the collaboration of SLT members, which consists of representatives of all constituents in school community. The following steps will be taken in developing shared accountability:  Development of a shared vision for student success that is aligned with the framework for great schools.  Alignment of the school vision with all partners  Development of clear systems for collecting, analyzing and sharing data with all constituents  Creation of a sustainable system to support student learning and academic success. This system will include a cycle of implementation, benchmarks, progress monitoring, and next steps. School leaders will ensure shared accountability by conducting regularly scheduled meeting with Assistant Principals, CBOs and community partners. School leaders will create a strategic plan which includes the RSCEP goals, stakeholders who are responsible for helping the school achieve their goals, the action plan and the intended results All students, parents and teachers will be provided with a handbook on the attendance, academic, behavioral, and social emotional expectations at LPA. The handbooks will include specific guidelines on how and/or when a child will need support from the School Culture Team, attendance policy (including incentives and consequences), CBO support and how/when to use Restorative Practices. Implementation of these guidelines will be monitored and supported by school leaders. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 53  What and how will the leader delegate to assistant principals and the community school director? A distributive leadership model with systems of accountability will be used. The Community School Director and the Assistant Principal areas of supervision will be determined based on the school community needs, and areas of expertise. The school leader would specifically delegated the Assistant Principal : ● Teacher evaluations ● Professional learning teams ● Supervision of the school culture team ● Supervision of a particular content area or grade ● Various administrative tasks The Community School Director will work with all CBO’s to ensure that they are an integral part of the school community, collaborating to plan activities that support the academic program, attendance initiatives, social- emotional development, leadership and promote overall student success. Additionally, the Community School Director will oversee the ELT program, health/vision screenings, Saturday Academy and any other expanded or extended learning opportunity in and outside of the school. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? A family center has been created for families to meet, workshops to be conducted and give computer access How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? Parents will elect a parent leader as a chair and select a co-chair. By-laws will be created with the assistance of the parent coordinator a How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? Meetings will be translated in the language of the parents and the CBO will support the teachers development to support diverse cultures in the school. What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 54  Type of Support Rationale Family Room Housing Assistance HSE and Adulty literacy Resource center with a meeting space and computer access HPD meetings for families in temporary housing Support for families How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Parent volunteers schedule time in the building Family partnerships with CBO: Family Engagement and Support in conjunction with the Parent Coordinator Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Yes. What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? Offering English courses, nutrition and GED courses to families What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? Access to Pupil Path and scholarship reports Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, the school, through its family engagement team will empower families as partners in their child’s learning by providing skill-building opportunities for families to engage in their child’s learning process resulting in a 3.5% increase in overall student attendance, moving from 81.5% (2017-18) to 85% (2018-19). Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve 4 year graduation rate 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 55 Attendance Regents completion 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 56 How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Scholarship reports parent attendance logs Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors should assist with this, PTA President - cannot be involved with this; student/parent information is to be kept confidential at all times as this could lead to a violation of FERPA. Parent Coordinator, CBO Director, Student Events Committee, Principal/Assistant Principal Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Parents graduation rate September 2017 - June 2018 Parents, Community, Students regents completion September 2017 - June 2018 Families will visit the building in order to check in with Parent Coordinator at which point the PC will ask the family 5 targeted questions that are aligned to parent needs (i.e. translation services, updated contact information, technology support, reason for visit, volunteer opportunities) Events planned periodically throughout the year that will promote parent involvement, adult education, and student support/fundraising.  Parent Coordinator will hold workshops centered on services for ELL’s and well as Special Education students; parents will be made aware that SPED services are available to every student no matter the grade or age.  PC/Principal/AP/Guidance Counselor/College Advisor will hold workshops on graduation requirements (i.e., credits needed, 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 57  Regents exams needed, 4+1 option, etc..) per grade level; do not limit it to juniors and seniors. Alternate ways to graduate will be discussed such as YABC’s, transfer schools and District 79 programs. A space will be created for parents to visit when they are in the building called “The Parent Center”, where they will have access to computers and support with job skills, resume writing, Pupil Path usage and access. Teachers can report to parent center during parent engagement time to support parents with reviewing student data and progress. All parents and Families regents completion attendance September 2017 - June 2018 Principal, CBO Director, Parent Coordinator, CBO Support Staff, Teachers Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  CBO will assign a person to assist PC coordinate the action plans above.   Longwood Prep HS staff will be assigned the responsibility of escorting visitors to PC office. Longwood Prep HS staff will be assigned to be a liaison between the parents for Pupil Path, Skedula, and other online systems  Appropriate furniture(couches, tables, chairs) and technology (workstations) will be provided to the Parent Center  Allocate funds for a full time Technology Specialist to create and maintain school’s website Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG or SIF Grant 21st Century School Success Grant C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By February 2019, PC will have collected data from ⅓ of families from family events Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 58  Foundations for success tool Part 6c. In February 2018, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 59  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students will be programmed in an Extended Learning Time activity (ELT) that is targeted to address their academic and/or social-emotional needs and interests so that the following benchmark will be met: Student overall attendance rate will meet or exceed 82%   4 Year graduation rate will be at least 65%  Progress Towards graduation rate will be at least 45% Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. The ELT program will be implemented by classroom teachers and/or community partners. Courses are embedded in the traditional school day, 8:20am -3:55pm. ELT courses are not isolated as an extended period. Instead, incorporating ELT courses within the instructional schedule allows for an increase of participation and attendance. The Community School Director (CSD) and CBO team will support with the monitoring of attendance. Parent outreach is conducted to communicate when scholars are late to first period and when they are not attending 8th period. ELT enrichment opportunities will also be available to students who are on track for graduation, such as additional CTE courses and College Now courses offsite. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 60  How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? The school will meet the following SED requirements for the ELT Program in a Renewal School by ensuring that the instructional program will be a combination of academics and enrichment. The ELT program will offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation. These activities can include, but are not limited to, CTE aligned projects, interdisciplinary projects, and post secondary opportunities both in and out of the classroom setting. Using specific student achievement data and student interest surveys, the following ELT opportunities will be offerred: Small group reading intervention   Advisory / Peer Group Connections Small group tutoring/Regents prep   CTE - Digital and audio literacy, Law & Justice  Math intervention (additional math instructional periods for 9th graders)  Photography  AP Courses in English Language, US History  College Now Courses at Hostos, BCC and Monroe College Evaluation of the program will be conducted using preliminary data, attendance, Regents passing, progress monitoring and outcome of student projects. Special Education teachers and ENL teachers are part of the ELT teaching team allowing all learners to access learning at their level of proficiency and with the adequate support, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting. Courses will contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 61  and art. Instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area. Pedagogical staff will lead all academic content related courses as well as interventions and Regents prep courses. CBO partners will provide enrichment opportunities during ELT. CBO partners will be used to increase student motivation through enrichment, parent outreach, attendance progress monitoring, and additional social emotional supports. Student Success Center will support the college-readiness opportunities available during ELT such as College Now and SAT Prep. CBO partners will assist in making live phone calls during 1st and 8th period to communicate to families their child’s progress as it relates to ELT. The Parent Coordinator will make additional outreach attempts to ensure families are aware of the structures and expectations for ELT. In addition, both CBO partners and Parent Coordinator will support with any questions or concerns expressed by families. All ELT courses are included in each scholar’s course schedule. ELT courses are not communicated as a separate course outside the school day. Instead, embedding ELT in the course schedule allows for a seamless transition. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. The ELT Program will be implemented and supervised by the Principal and Assistant Principal The Community Based Organizations (Center for Supportive Schools) will support the ELT program by providing student programs and by providing small group and one on one mentoring for severely chronically absent students. The ELT Program’s impact on student achievement will be evaluated based on attendance rates, pre/post assessments, course work, credit accrual, regents pass rates and the learning environment survey. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The ELT program will begin the first instructional day of school and end the last instructional day of school in June. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 62  Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program.  Community Partners  Trained Teachers  Programming to ensure ELT is embedded in the school day  Budget Allocation for CBO partnerships (Ed Alchemy, Justice Resource Center)  Budget Allocation for CSS to provide PD for advisory program   CTE Grant / Mental Health Grant for Recording Studio Student Success Center Program Coordinator facilitates College Now programs Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. X 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy Title III X Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X P/F Set-aside SIG or SIF Grant School Success Grant X C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks By February 2019, in partnership with our CBO, we will monitor the impact of ELT as evidenced by at least 82% Attendance Rate YTD. By February 201`9, CBOs, school leaders, teachers and school counselors will review credit accumulation data to monitor the progress of the ELT program as evidenced by at least 75% of all students across all grade levels will earn 5 or more credits in semester 1. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. New Visions Portal Part 6c. In February 2018, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 63  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. Through the Community School partnership with the Center for Supportive Schools, Longwood Preparatory Academy’s (the Prep's) community school strategy will focus on (1) increasing attendance, (2) building parent leadership and connecting parents with resources to support family success and (3) providing comprehensive social and emotional supports to students. This work to build a foundation for academic success will include:      implementation three staff retreats during the year led by CSS focused on team-building amongst staff, the school-wide instructional focus, and implementation of DataWise implementation of Achievement Mentoring to provide structures for advisors to support students’ academic success using a positive behavioral reinforcement approach implementation of Safe Dates training for advisors, incorporating healthy relationships curriculum into advisory creating opportunities for parent leadership and building the capacity of a school-based social worker to connect parents with needed resources continuing to support the implementation of Peer Group Connection (PGC), including the implementation of 10th grade booster sessions to reinforce the PGC learnings for 10th graders  providing 1-1 counseling support and small groups for students to engage in to support social and  emotional development implement a morning breakfast study room to provide a space for students to seek support for and complete academic work. Further, the CSD will be integrated into the Student Success Team, Instructional Cabinet, and teacher team meetings to ensure the integration of social and emotional and academic supports. By June 2019, we will:: increase average daily attendance by 1.5%   decrease chronic absenteeism by 2%  engage 25% of families through participation in school events, leadership development support, and connection to needed resources  engage at least 50% of the school population in a social-emotional support structure. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Student Attendance 4-Year Graduation Rate Regents Completion Rate 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 64  Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Center for Supportive Schools Chronically Absent Scholars Educational Alchemy, Bronx Power All Scholars Center for Supportive Schools All families Good Shepherds Services All Scholars Center for Supportive Schools All Scholars Success Mentoring, Attendance and Student Progress Teams Tuesday-Thursday after school sports and enrichment programming Parent programming including parenting wellness classes, ELL classes and HSE classes Pre-College awareness, College trips, College application support, College Now, SAT Prep Social worker provides mental health counseling Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 1. Key strategies for leveraging the Community School Director Include:  Use the Community School Team (CST), led by the Community School Director, that meets monthly to coordinate CBO efforts with the school and that regularly reviews data to relevant to its key areas of work: attendance, community outreach, and school environment Include the Community School Director as a member of the principal’s cabinet so that he is closely involved with the policy- and culture-making of the school  2017-18 RSCEP-ON 65   Organize regular meetings to include the Principal and Extended Leadership Team, the Community School Director, Center for Supportive Schools Program Manager, and the Director of Renewal Schools as part of a monitoring process Include CBO staff as members of school teams, such as the Attendance Team, PBIS Team, and grade-level teams  2. Structures to help us identify individual needs and individualize services to meet them:  The Attendance and Student Progress Team will determine level 1 intervention strategies, track progress, and—if necessary—make referrals to the guidance staff and/or social worker. The Attendance and Student Progress Team will include members from CBO’s providing academic, mental health, family outreach, and school environment support  The guidance counselors, social worker, and administration will determine Level 2 and 3 interventions in support of scholars that include one or more of the following: social services support, parent conferences, counseling, psychological evaluations, medical help, academic support, etc.  The Family Engagement Team, which is charged with parent outreach and attendance improvement. As this team inquires into the circumstances behind absences, it makes referrals to the Attendance and Student Progress Team as well. Currently, we and our partners offer counseling, social work, and health and mental health services.  The Center for Supportive School's Community School Support Team, which will coordinate and/or provide Success Mentoring, ELT programming, academic, community outreach and school environment support for scholars and teachers. 3. Our overarching strategy for making Longwood Preparatory Academy a place where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children is the Community School Team, which meets monthly. The CST, is comprised of key school and community leaders, and is the formal place for ensuring that participating community members have a voice in the life and development of the school. The Team’s primary job is to create policies and plans that:  Align student out-of-school time with classroom learning  Bring communities, families, and the school together  Coordinate resources for children and families The CST is comprised of 12-20 members who represent a wide array of school and community stakeholders, as shown in the chart below. The CST includes an Executive Committee comprised of the school-based personnel who are authorized to oversee execution of the Team’s plans and policies. The Executive Committee consists of the principal, the school’s instructional leader, the school’s director of operations, and the Community School Director. The CST develops and communicates a shared vision and clarity around roles, responsibilities, goals, expectations, and key tasks. The work culminates in the creation of:  Chart which illustrates the school and community’s shared vision, goals and objectives to support the vision  An Organizational Chart which illustrates roles, relationships, and responsibilities  A work plan assigning tasks, action steps, due dates, and guidelines for how people will work together to realize the shared vision  A data tracking chart that creates a framework for analyzing and presenting the school’s progress toward its goals  Use of DataWise protocols for using data to support the Community School vision and implementation 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 66   A protocol for making and communicating policy recommendations A key element of this system is the Community School Team CST, who helps the CST design systems that proactively minimize conflict by troubleshooting situations that lead to it. Another is the CST’s representative, who represents the community organizations on the School Leadership Team. Instructional Systems Representation Instructional Leader Teacher(s) Organizational Systems Representation Principal Director of Operations Assistant Principal(s) Counselors Social Workers Assistant Principal(s), Student(s) Parents Para professional staff Grandparents Instructional coaches and consultants Students Guardians Engineering Staff Food Service Staff Community Representation Community School Coordinator Community School Liaison Health Services Mental Health Services, Arts and Recreation, Youth Development Organizations Social Services Local business leaders Churches or other faith- based organizations Law enforcement 4. To analyze trends in data and case manage individual students, the Principal will meet on a weekly basis with the Community School Director. They will use data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter and other interim indicators listed in this RSCEP – to monitor the progress of the community school work and they will share their findings with the CST and other key teams and leaders involved in implementing the community school plan. They will meet regularly with Office of Community Schools staff to review progress and receive training in the use of data tools. Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. Partners include: 2. Kinvolved - parent engagement 3. EdAlchemy 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 67  4. Blue Engine - in-class academic support CSD focus areas for the 17-18 school year include: (1) decreasing chronic absenteeism (2) parent engagement and (3) youth development/social and emotional student supports. The Community School Team will include: principal, parent leaders, teachers, CSD, social worker,representatives from partner organizations and other community partners. A meeting agenda will be provided prior to each meeting via email to all participants. Meetings will begin with a team-building “check-in” and proceed to review progress on community school goals. Meeting structures will be implemented (such as pair share, small group activities, etc.) to ensure equity of voice in providing feedback and input. Each meeting will end with time for reflection on the meeting, identifying “takeaways” and an email will be sent to the group by the CSD recapping the outcomes and next steps identified in the meeting. The Student Sorter will be used on a daily, weekly, and monthly basis to identify and connect students (both subgroups and individuals) in need of personalized/individualized supports. Prevention initiatives and intervention initiatives will be tracked in the Student Sorter and this data will be analyzed regularly, in partnership with the CST and other key school stakeholders, to evaluate effectiveness and to implement new strategies as needed. Partner organizations will also be required to provide monthly reports documenting progress against stated outcomes and these updates will be discussed in monthly check-in meetings with the CSD. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. 1. Partners include: 1. Kinvolved - parent engagement 2. Educational Alchemy 3. Blue Engine - in-class academic support CSD focus areas for the 17-18 school year include: (1) decreasing chronic absenteeism (2) parent engagement and (3) youth development/social and emotional student supports. 2. The Community School Team will include: principal, parent leaders, teachers, CSD, social worker,representatives from partner organizations and other community partners. A meeting agenda will be provided prior to each meeting via email to all participants. Meetings will begin with a team-building “check-in” and proceed to review progress on community school goals. Meeting structures will be implemented (such as pair share, small group activities, etc.) to ensure equity of voice in providing feedback and input. Each meeting will end with time for reflection on the meeting, identifying “takeaways” and an email will be sent to the group by the CSD recapping the outcomes and next steps identified in the meeting. 3. The Student Sorter will be used on a daily, weekly, and monthly basis to identify and connect students (both subgroups and individuals) in need of personalized/individualized supports. Prevention initiatives and intervention initiatives will be tracked in the Student Sorter and this data will be analyzed regularly, in partnership with the CST and other key school stakeholders, to evaluate effectiveness and to implement new strategies as needed. Partner organizations will also be required to provide monthly reports documenting progress against stated outcomes and these updates will be discussed in monthly check-in meetings with the CSD. Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 68   Peer Group Connection (PGC) -- The daily peer leadership course for selected 12th grade peer leaders will begin in September 2018 and 9th grade outreach sessions will begin in September 2018 and will continue through June 2019. o Achievement Mentoring -- a kick-off luncheon will occur in September 2018. Weekly mentoring will start no later than end of September 2018 and will continue through June 2019. Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 69  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) - Small group instruction - Saturdays throughout the school year - Small group reading intervention classes - During ELTand regular school day -WIN (What I Need) Fridays in ELA classes - small group instruction on targeted skill gaps Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) - Students who have not passed the ELA Common Core Regents or who have not met college readiness goal of a 75 Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) - Saturday School - Regents Prep Class - PowerUpReading Program -REWARDS -Orton Gilliam - Students reading below 5th grade will receive REWARDS; students reading below 3rd grade will receive OG; All students will utilize PowerUp - Students who have not earned required ELA credits Review of credit accumulation on student transcript, report cards, attendance rates - Parental request for special education evaluation 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 70  Mathematics - Students who have not passed the Algebra Common Core Regents or who have not met college readiness goal of a 70 -Saturday School - Small group instruction -Regents Prep Classes - iXL - Math intervention classes for 9th graders - Lowest 2/3 of incoming 9th grade class will receive additional periods of math each week - Lowest 2/3 of incoming 9th grade class based on 8th grade test scores - Saturdays throughout the school year - During ELT Science - Students who have not earned required Math credits Review of credit accumulation on student transcript, report cards, Attendance rates - Parental request for special education evaluation -Students who have not passed the Living Environment Regents - Students who have not earned required Science credits Review of credit accumulation on student transcript, report cards, attendance rates -Saturday School Small group instruction -Regents Prep/Castle Learning -REWARDS for Science -APEX for Credits -Saturdays throughout the school year -During ELT 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 71  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) -Parental request for special education evaluation - Students who have not passed the Global History or US History Regents - Students who have not earned required Global or US History credits Review of credit accumulation on student transcript, report cards, Attendance rates - Parental request for special education evaluation Cohort Tracking Review of credit accumulation on student transcript, report cards, Attendance rates, Referrals Small group instruction -Saturdays throughout the school year -During ELT -Saturday School - APEX for Credits -REWARDS for Social Studies -Regents Prep/Castle Learning Mandated Counseling Services One on one counseling -During regular school day Counseling Services for At-Risk by CBO Small group counseling - During Advisory Periods 2x a week - Afterschool Morris Heights Health Clinic or CBO Social Worker Advisory Advisory SWAG Mentors (Success Mentors) for Severely Chronically Absent Students 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 72  2017-18 RSCEP-ON 73  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 30 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. HPD housing fair, school uniforms, school supplies, hygiene supplies Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 74  HPD housing fair, school uniforms, school supplies, hygiene supplies 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $2700 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 75  Section 10: Career and Technical Education (CTE) Programs (Requirement for “Out of Time” Priority High Schools) Directions: In this section, provide a description of the Career and Technical Education (CTE) program offerings at schools in Good Standing that students in this school will have access to during the 2018-19 school year. In collaboration with the School of Cooperative and Technical Education (CoOp Tech), longwood preparatory academy shall offer Career and Technical Education (CTE) classes as both shared instruction and daily CTE classes. Shared instruction CTE classes via CoOp Tech:  Certified Nursing Assistant (CNA)  Plumbing  Medical Office Management  Carpentry Longwood Preparatory Academy CTE course offerings: Digital Literacy All 9th and 10th grade scholars will achieve IC3 certification through a year long course focused on digital literacy, key production applications and the internet. Scholars will be responsible for creating presentations, spreadsheets and word documents and compiling their work into a digital Acrobat portfolio that will continue to be compiled throughout their secondary academic career. This portfolio will be posted on a student homepage that will also be created during the course unit involving internet studies. Digital Filmmaking Students in 11th and 12th grade who participated in CTE course offerings in 2017-2018 will have the opportunity to study narrative and documentary filmmaking according to lesson components in the ADOBE digital video production and Moving Image curriculums. Basic audio engineering concepts will also be covered in this annualized course. Scholars will be required to complete fiction and nonfiction short form work. Students will receive Adobe Digital Video Certiport. Work Based Learning Any students in the digital filmmaking course will be eligible for work based learning opportunities through partnerships with local industries in media, IT, advertising and design. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 76  Section 11: Professional Development Plan (Requirement for “Out of Time” Priority Schools) Directions: In this section, provide a description of the mandatory professional development that will be provided to school leadership and staff during the 2018-19 school year. Include any professional development that will occur during the summer months. The mandatory professional development plan for Longwood Prep is aimed at ensuring that all staff members are equipped with the pedagogical practices, social-emotional training and resources to provide the highest quality of education for all students in our school community. Onsite Teacher Coaching (September 2018-June 2019) Office of Renewal School (ORS) and FSC coaches who service ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies, will support teachers in aligning instruction across grades with the Common Core Instructional shifts as they work with individual and small groups of teachers weekly. Coaches will also provide professional learning opportunities, facilitate common planning, assist in arranging within-school inter-visitations so that teachers can see colleagues exemplary practice, and guide the development of unit and lesson plans as per grade level curriculum maps and pacing calendars. School wide Afternoon professional development (September 2017 through June 2018) Weekly professional development will be held after school and will be organized into professional learning cycles, focusing on topics of needs, informed by instructional cabinet inquiry and aligned to the school instructional focus. Topics may include the following:  Gradual Release of Responsibility  Using Assessment Data to Modify Instruction  Providing Actionable Feedback to Students    Hochman Strategies  Supporting Students in Action Planning and Academic Goal Setting Aligned to Course Outcomes Strategies for Supporting English Language Learners Implementation of Schoolwide Advisory Program - Social Emotional Learning and Support for Students learning walks In collaboration with school leaders, teachers will select an area of focus for their learning walks. This may be an area in which they need improve or an area in which they want to learn more about to further develop their practice. Learning walk cohorts will visit one member each month and one Monday afternoon a month will be dedicated to debriefing these visits and planning next steps.  CTE Academic Integration  English Language Learners  Reading Intervention  Questioning & Discussion  Use of Technology to Engage Students 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 77  mentoring and support for early career teachers First year teachers and teachers new to LPA are invited to monthly Professional Learning sessions facilitated by teh Assistant Principal. During these session, teachers learn about school instructional priorities, lesson planning expectations, and strategies that have been successful across LPA classrooms. First and select 2nd year teachers are also provided a mentor. Peer Collaborative and Model teachers serve as mentors. Off-site Professional Development - Summer 2018 through June 2019 At Longwood Prep we support staff to seek professional development opportunities outside of school to further develop their skills in their specific areas of expertise. We will work with the Superintendent’s Office, Office of Renewal Schools, BFSC and other partners to coordinate professional development offerings for staff. It is the expectation that staff who attend off-site professional development return to the school and turn-key new learning within their departments or during school-wide professional development, as applicable. Topics will include: Leading Inquiry Teams   Hochman Writing Strategies  New Visions Professional Development for Social Studies and Science  DataWise  Offerings from BFSC for ENL and content areas   CTE Academic Integration Justice Resource Center 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 78  Section 12: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Longwood Preparatory Academy will implement the following strategies to recruit and retain highly qualified teachers: Recruitment: LPA will attend teacher fairs given by the NYCDOE office of Teacher Leadership, NYC Teaching Fellows and other organizations. In addition, we will publicize vacancies using social media, job opening websites such as: (Monster.com, Craigslist, HigherEd Jobs, Indeed.com,and Facebook). We will also develop contacts and relationships with surrounding colleges and universities such as: Lehman College, Fordham University, and Hunter College. Retention: At LPA we intend to make sure that each new hire is paired with a mentor teacher and will meet and plan with an administrator at least once per week. Administration will ensure that the teacher is welcomed into the school community and is adjusting well. In addition, teachers have an opportunity to meet with coaches and the DSR from the Office of Renewal Schools to assist with the implementation of Common Core aligned. Teachers will also be a part of both grade and content area team which will meet daily interchangeably. Assignments: Teachers' assignments are planned according to licensing. We carefully align instructional needs of our students across grade levels with corresponding teachers and provide common planning time for collaboration both in grade teams and vertical content teams. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 79  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). At LPA, teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals will be a part of weekly professional development for 60 minutes on each Monday. These opportunities for professional learning will be centered around the school’s learning needs, differentiated at times to fit the various needs of staff members and support the implementation of the Common Core State Standards at our school. In addition, opportunities will be provided to staff members to lead PD and also attend PD outside the school. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 80  intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local n/a $31, 451 $30,061 n/a n/a n/a 1,577,625 n/a X X n/a n/a n/a X Column B Section Reference(s) n/a 5A, 5B, 5C, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E n/a n/a na/ 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 81  and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG or SIF funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 82  Section 13: Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 08X530 Longwood Preparatory Academy in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Longwood Preparatory Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Families of Title I Students  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 83  The school’s Parent Involvement Parent Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    2017-18 RSCEP-ON 84  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Longwood Preparatory Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 85  respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by:  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 86  Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   2017-18 RSCEP-ON 87  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities       attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 88  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 89  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The English Language Learner Department has reviewed all NYSESLAT data looking for patterns and trends. After having carefully reviewed and compared the NYSESLAT data and student's areas of focus, we have determined that our English Language Learners need to work on developing their writing, reading, speaking and listening skills, which are needed to achieve graduation requirements as well as making progress towards acquiring English language, as measured under the title III accountability. These opportunities will be offered during our Saturday Academy, beginning October 6, 2018 and ending June 15, 2019, from 9:00am - 2:00pm. At least one teacher from each of the core content areas (math, science, social studies, english), at least one ENL teacher, and a school supervisor facilitate this program. During these sessions, our English Language Learners in grades 9-12 will be attending courses instructed by either an ENL teacher, a content area teacher, or both. Direct instruction will be provided to all ELLs with a focus on language acquisition to support student's on the NYSESLAT. Small group Regents Prep intervention classes will be provided for those students who have not yet passed a particular Regents. In addition, students who are behind in credits will have the opportunity to take credit-bearing courses during our Saturday Academy. The per-session funds needed for this program exceed our Title III budgeted amount and will be supplemented with additional per-session funds from our school budget. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Longwood Preparatory's professional development programs involve on-going, on-site and off-site professional development opportunities. Under the school leadership we have created opportunities for both ENL teachers and content area teachers to receive on-site and off-site professional development via support from our FSC ENL instructional coach and consultants. Our ENL certified teachers will lead a Monday professional development session for all staff, where all instructional staff will learn about scholars ENL levels and implications for teaching and learning. In addition, we are partnering with WESTed to provide QTEL training to all staff members. The first session was held in August and subsequent sessions will occur throughout the fall. QTEL consultants will also conduct coaching cycles with a small subgroup of our ENL and content area teachers who will lead and turnkey strategies to their departmental teams. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 90  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The parents of our English Language Learners, grades 9-12, will be provided with a meeting twice per year (Fall & Spring). Students and parents are expected to attend both of these events. Our initial meeting, will be held on September 26, 2018 , which is back to school night where parents learn about the individual course expectations from all teachers. At this event, parents of ELLs will also be directed to their child's ENL teacher as a way to re-introduce parents to our reading intervention program and Title III rights and programs. During this time, ENL teachers will also re-share NYSESLAT scores with families and help them gain an understanding of what the scores mean for their child's English language acquisition. Food, Raffles and Metro Cards are provided in order to maximize attendance. Our second meeting, to be held in March 2019, will be a meeting where parents can meet one-on-one with our licensed ENL teachers to discuss students’ literacy progress as evidenced using a combination of reading assessments and classroom summative and formative assessments. Parents are notified of these activities via letters mailed home, phone calls from teachers and our parent coordinator, and text messaging outreach. We will request DOE translation services to provide interpretation for parents for all parental meetings. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Per-Session for ENL Teachers, Content Teachers and Supervisor of Saturday School Program Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 12,366  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 91  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 92  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Bronx District 08 School Name Longwood Preparatory Academy School Number 530 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Asya Johnson Coach Loveena Thomas ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jessica Mendez Teacher/Subject Area Cristina Resek-Abellas Teacher/Subject Area Cristina Abellas Related-Service Provider Lisa Murph Superintendent Carron Staple Assistant Principal Michelle Venditti Coach type here School Counselor Aurisis Pena Parent Elizabeth Mojica Parent Coordinator Cynthia Paula-Montes Field Support Center Staff Member Loveena Thomas Other (Name and Title) Marcell Deans C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 4 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 330 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 93 Total number of ELLs 47 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 14.24%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis - - - - - - 0 3 - - - - - - 0 4 - - - - - - 0 2 - - - - - - 0 5 - - - - - - 0 6 - - - - - - 0 7 - - - - - - 0 8 - - - - - - 0 9 - - - - - - 0 10 11 12 - - - - - - 0 - - - - - - 0 - - - - - - 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs, we have administered the "Periodic Assessment for English Language Learners" prepared by PowerUp and Rapid by Rosetta Stone for grades 9-12. The results of this assessment will help us identify the listening, reading and writing levels that our ELLs need to improve academically and guide us in designing coherent instructional plans. Furthermore, we are planning to administer the Gates McGinities and Orton Gilliam assessments for all students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Scheduled ENL specialist period and intervention periods built into the school's master schedule 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 94  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Success is evaluated based on NYSESLAT scores reported in the RLAT report, credit accumulation and regents performance growth. We take into consideration the number of students scoring proficient/commanding or advancing one proficiency level as per the NYSELAT. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Scheduled interventions during ELT time and during Saturday Academy. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Using data from the curriculum embedded assessments students will receive small group reading intervention during the school day and on Saturdays 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Outcomes from regents data, reading and math assessments are used to inform our instruction and support services for our ENL students 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Data will be shared with grade teams along with a spreadsheet on ways to support ENL students during instruction. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction for ELLS will be delivered in standalone classes based on the levels of our ENL scholars. Additionally, ENL instruction will be provided in a variety of content area classes. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our assistant principal collaborates with our ENL teachers to highlight students’ proficiency levels and properly program them for stand-alone , push-in, ELT ENL classes to meet the mandated number of instructional minutes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 95  In content area classes, the teachers use the workshop model. Following the mini-lesson the students engage in guided practice which is followed by independent practice. The teachers differentiate lessons and activities. They design assessments and scaffolds to gauge and improve student learning. Uniform practices such as taking notes using the Cornell Note Taking Style and incorporating different levels of depth of knowledge questions is incorporated in content area lessons to make content comprehensible. Even though the language of instruction may be in English most of the time, lessons include vocabulary instruction and students are provided with reference materials in their native language. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? When students are initially enrolled in our school, our ENL teacher administers the Spanish Lab to students. Based on their level students are enrolled in the appropriate class and receive appropriate instruction. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Our teachers create differentiated lessons and activities for ENL subgroups. Additionally, SIFE students, beginner level and new comers participate in the ELLIS Program to increase their vocabulary, to lower their affective filter and to help them improve their grammar as well as their listening and speaking skills. SIFE need Literacy skills in the L1 (or L2). To develop mastery of English, they need intensive ESL instruction. Furthermore, they need intensive academic literacy instruction, (preferably in both L1 and L2) and they need background knowledge to study the academic subjects taught in English. They benefit from content knowledge being taught in L1 to bring them up to grade level. When teaching SIFE and newcomers, we provide bilingual dictionaries, glossaries, word walls as well as texts translated to their native language. We scaffold instruction by using visuals, sentence starters, graphic organizers, extensive modelling and include pre-reading and pre-writing activities to activate prior knowledge as well as to build background information. We make use of structured and guided activities that support students in using their home language as a resource to make sense of, and deepen, their understanding of the content they learn. Students are intentionally grouped, with partners or in triads, with peers who share their home language. This allows students to support one another to explore and elaborate their understanding of ideas.Students receiving 4 to 6 years of service are one of the two target groups created by our ESL Department. We look closely at these students NYSESLAT testing patterns alongside their regents’ performance and classroom performance in developing action plans for these individual students. These action plans may involve participating in extended day school, after-school tutoring and/or in class reading and writing conferences with licensed ESL teachers. d. Long term ELL students are the second target group of the ESL Department. For this group again, we look closely at these students’ NYSESLAT testing patterns alongside their regents’ performance and classroom performance in developing action plans for these individual students. e. As for our former formers ELLs, we develop individual action plans based on their regents’ performance and classroom performance. Students who test out and become former ELLs are offered transition services for up to 2 years: The transitional services consist of a half unit of ESL/ENL or services that monitor and support the student’s language development and academic progress as well as ELL testing accommodations. The testing accommodations for ELLs and up to two years for former ELLs consist of 1) time extension, 2) Separate location, 3)Third reading of listening selection in English Language Arts exams, 4) Use of bilingual dictionaries and/or glossaries, 5) simultaneous use of English and alternative language editions of state examinations for which SED provides written translations, 6) Writing responses in the home language if making use of alternative language editions or of oral translations of state examinations may write their responses to the open-ended question in their home languages. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 96  The teachers of ELL-SWDs choose materials that are appropriate to the instructional level of their students based on the results of the Gates McGinities tests that are given to the students by the IEP Teacher. Instruction is delivered using the workshop model and all lessons include vocabulary development. Teachers differentiate lessons and activities based on the needs of their students. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ENL teacher along with the general teaching staff examines the IEPs of ELLs identified as having special needs in order to determine how students can achieve their IEP goals in their classrooms. The teachers differentiate their lessons according to the needs of these students. Furthermore, these students participate in the ELLIS Program, extended school-day and/or after school tutoring. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. SIFE and new comer students receive push in support in any course they take that terminates in a regents examination in the content areas of Social Studies, ELA, Math and Science. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will add the ELLIS program as well as the WITsi 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Na- 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELL students are offered extra support in after-school. Teachers of ELL students invite ELL students and their families to participate in school activities. Our ELLs participate in our blended learning programs and regents preparation programs offered during extended day and in after-school. Additionally, we provide extracurricular activities, which include varisty basketball, Soccer Club, Creative Writing, Build-on, Wrestling, Year Book Club, Art Club and Varsity Baseball . 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Throughout the year, ELLs read fiction and non-fiction texts and explore different themes. Through whole group instruction, small group activities and individual work, they read and analyze short stories, novels and articles. They engage in conversations and write about characters and themes in these works. As they critically read and respond to the events and themes, they work on improving their reading, writing, speaking and listening skills in English. All ENL students are enrolled in CTE courses with a bilingual teacher. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our school has purchased dictionaries and downloaded glossaries in our students' native languages and we also have books in students native language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Using NYS ESL performance indicators as an anchor, our ESL department in consultation with our content area department strive to create relevant curricula that speaks to students' age and grade levels and also aligns to the general education courses students are programmed for. ere: 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Throughout the year, ELLs read fiction and non-fiction texts and explore different themes. Through whole group instruction, small group activities and individual work, theyread and analyze short stories, novels and articles. They engage in 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 97  conversations and write about characters and themes in these works. As they critically read and respond to the events and themes, they work on improving their reading, writing, speaking and listening skills in English. They use the internet to conduct research or use Microsoft computer programs to create power point presentations or to type and edit their writing projects. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Required to attend Saturday school and afterschool remediation with support from CBOs 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All Longwood Prep students are offered Spanish electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NA Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ESL teacher meets with the content area teachers biweekly during grade & department meetings to discuss student progress and curricular design. School Leadership receives periodic updates of OELL professional development trainings relating to ELL students at the high school level. We encourage staff to examine students assessments (formative and summative). Additionally, ESL teachers work with content area teachers to develop strategies to improve the academic performance of ESL students within the content area. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. This year we plan to have the ELL teacher conduct two all school wide workshop focusing on ELL assessment data to share promising practices when working with ELL students. A sign-in sheet and a reflection sheet will be used to record staff participation in these workshops. Teachers attend professional development offered OELL throughout the school year. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The goals are discussed during open house, parent workshop for ELLs, and individual parent meeting with the ESL provider. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 98  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 3- Currently, our school is working to improve parental involvement within the school. We hope to improve parental involvement through hosting during an afters-chool showcases of student work. All parents will be invited for these events and the parents of ELL students will receive specialized invitations to attend these events. Within these events we will have conversations on important information pertaining to student achievement including regents performance, student credit accumulation, new programs and curricula etc. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. na 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 99 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Asya Johnson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 100  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Longwood Preparatory Academy School DBN: 08x530 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Asya Johnson Title Principal Michelle Venditti Assistant Principal Cynthia Paula-Montes Parent Coordinator Jessica Mendez ENL/Bilingual Teacher Elizabeth Mojica Parent Cristina Abellas Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Aurisis Pena School Counselor Michael Alcoff Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 101  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 08X530 School Name: Longwood Preparatory Academy Superintendent: M. Alcoff The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jessica Mendez ENL Teacher No No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Based on the Home Language Identification Survey, the preferred languages for translation and oral interpretation is Spanish and Bengali. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic - 2 - .7 - 2 - .7 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 102  Bengali French Mandinka English Spanish 1 1 1 185 97 .35 .35 .35 64.46 33.8 1 1 1 186 96 .35 .35 .35 64.81 33.45 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Monthly school calendar Once per month Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All documents are translated in English or Spanish. We could use support with translating documents in Bengali, Arabic and Mandinka for a few of our parents. Text messages via kinvolved in the parents home language Weekly or as needed for text messages and letters to parents Kinvolved translates text messages in parent preferred language. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 103  Letters to parents to inform them of events in the school Weekly or as needed for text messages and letters to parents All documents are translated in English or Spanish. Letters regarding students attendance, conduct, and academic progress Phone Blast announcements of important meetings and school events Weekly or as needed We could use support with translating documents in Bengali, Arabic and Mandinka for a few of our parents. All documents are translated in English or Spanish. We could use support with translating documents in Bengali, Arabic and Mandinka for a few of our parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? A request will be made for a Bengali, Arabic and Mandinka translator and we have mostly Spanish/English bilingual staff members who will translate for our parents Conferences are scheduled three times as year Parent teacher conferences PA Meetings are Monthly SLT meetings are Monthly Parent workshops and school events are quarterly PA meetings SLT meetings Parent workshops Special school events Teachers are expected to maintain communication with parents 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 104  regarding their child’s academic progress Attendance outreach Parent coordinator parent outreach regarding school events, volunteer opportunities, and one on one support - - - - - - - - - 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We will use Kinvolve as a way of communicating with our families. The messages are received by the parent in their home language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Chancellor’s Regulations will be reviewed with teachers at the beginning of the school year and outlined in the school’s handbook. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The information will be provided to parents during PA meeting and parent workshops. All literature will be translated in the home language of the parent. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 105  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will solicit formal and informal feedback from parents regarding quality and availability of translation services through surveys. The parent engagement team will include this item as one of the questions on their parent survey. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 106 
