 15K001 School Name: P.S. 001 THE BERGEN Principal: ARLENE RAMOS   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Public School 1K 331500010001 Pre K-5 th 309 47 th Street, Brooklyn 11220 718 567-7661 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 15K001 718 567-9771 Fax: Arlene Ramos ARamos4@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 15 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Arlene Ramos Kathleen Massar Francisco Coatl Jessica Tamerlani Refugio Escamilla n/a n/a District Information Anita Skop Superintendent: 131 Livingston Street ASkop@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 935-4317 Phone Number: 718 935-4356 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn NorthFSC: Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston St. Room 501 BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 225-5119 Phone Number: 718 935-4314 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Arlene Ramos Kathleen Massar Francisco Coatl n/a Refugio Escamilla n/a n/a Jessica Tamerlani Junior Iglesia Catherine Marquez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Teacher/SLTChairperson Teacher Teacher Member/   EliaHueyopan Sandra Cordero Cresencia Galicia Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our School Mission Statement is: We as a building believe that all our students can learn and move towards the Common Core Learning Standards when we as a school community:  Use data to inform our instruction    Develop tools to support all our students' academic and social/emotional functioning including English as a Native Language Learners and Students with Disabilities  Provide students with rigorous instruction to prepare them to be college and career ready  Use technology to prepare our students for the 21st century  Collaborate with our colleagues to reflect on our practices to support students' growth  Actively communicate with our parents on how we can improve student progress  Develop a community of trust that fosters the sharing of ideas and initiatives  Consistently refine on our teaching practices in order to promote student progress 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 1 has over 1,000 students. The majority of our students live in homes where their families speak Spanish as their native language. Of these students, approximately 20% are students with disabilities. Our ELL and SWD students are currently reading several grade levels behind their peers. In efforts to support our students to improve their critical skills including reading comprehension, creative thinking, writing, math and cultural tolerance, we have developed various partnerships. Our belief is students move to the point where they are reading at grade level when they are engaged in experiences that stimulate their imagination and provide hands-on opportunities across all content areas. We have seen our students develop a deeper understanding of the content when they are able to engage in productive struggle with their peers. Young children enjoy engaging in problem solving and this creates opportunities for interactions with peers. The teacher fosters a safe learning environment for learning to take place. It is a setting where risk taking and making mistakes are promoted for optimal learning. The expansion of our arts department and our affiliations with various art programs provide our students with the ability to bring literature alive and understand how math and literacy supports their pathway to higher education. Our students excel in science as evidenced by the 2018 science exam. Eighty eight percent of our student scored level 3's and 4's in the forth grade science exam. Students who participated in student centered approaches excelled both in literacy and math on the 2017/2018 citywide math and ELA exam. In efforts to support the various learners in our building we have partnered with numerous programs to ensure we are using multiple entry points to address the achievement gap. These are the organizations we are partnering with:  Community Word Project  Dramatists Guild Foundation  Brooklyn Youth Chorus  Councilman’s Office  Center For Family Life (Community Based Organization)  NYU Langone Medical Center   Center for Integrated Teacher Education Workshops  Parents  Learning Partners Program FDNY and NYPD 0  Grow New York  Health Plus  New York Aquarium  Robin Hood Grant Cool Culture (Pre-k only) LEAP (ESL First Grade Only) Snug Harbor Studio in a School (Pre-k and k)  Cookshop  Brooklyn Museum of Art     Recycling  Reach For the World   Algebra for All  N.Y Road Runner Literacy Collaborative We have sustained and established special initiatives to encourage parents to be partners in our school. Fabulous Fridays Fitness classes will be provided to families during Parent Engagement Time  Monthly Meetings with Parents   Evening Workshops   Technology during Parent Engagement Time  Monthly Parent Trips  Homework helps for parents and students   Monthly Parent Executive Board Meetings  Weekly Parent meeting with Parent Coordinator   Parent workshops  Coffee Hour (Pre-K) SLT (including a CBO member) Saturday Parent Program 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. In reviewing the 2017/2018 NYSESLAT, ELA, Math and 4th grade Science exam we noticed the following:      Students in grade three decreased in math proficiency as compared to the third grade students who took the exam the year prior. However, our ELL students and our SWD students improved their performance. Students in fourth grade had fewer level one's and an increase in level 2-4 on the math exam Students in fifth grade moved from level 1 to levels 2-4 on the math exam. Students in grade 4 increased their level 3 and 4's compared to the previous year. SWD students moved from level 1 to level 2 In Science boys scored level 3 and 4's and girls maintained level 2 and 3's. General education students were level 3 and 4's, Swd were level 2 and 3's and ELL students were level 2 and 3.  On the NYSESLAT we had a decrease in the entering, emerging and transitioning language levels. We had an increase in the expanding and commanding levels. Females made greater gains than males on this exam. 1  In reviewing this data it is evident that our ELL and SWD students need support in their literacy skills in order to be able to improve across the content. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Based on the 2017-2018 School Survey the elements we made the most progress are: Effective School Leadership: Our element scores increased from 2.94 to 3.48 Trust: Our element scores increased from 2.89 to 3.66 Our school survey results are: Supportive Environment: Our element scores increased from 3.02 to 3.38  Rigorous Instruction: Our element scores increased from 2.76 to 2.94  Collaborative Teachers: Our element scores increased from 2.74 to 3.04   Effective School Leadership: Our element scores increased from 2.94 to 3.48   Trust: Our element scores increased from 2.89 to 3.66 Strong Family- Community ties: Our element scores increased from 3.08 to 3.22 Based on the 2017-2018 Principal's Performance Review The Areas of celebration were: Q.R 1-1 Curriculum Development: The school was found to have a coherent ELA curriculum which enables students to smoothly transition from one grade to the next in a seamless manner. The use of Go Math curriculum was found to adequately support the needs of our large English Language Learner Population. Q.R. 1-3Leveraging Resources: The school leader was identified as utilizing all resources to enhance and expand student growth through a focus of professional development, cycles of coaching and a significant number of enrichment opportunities for parents and students school wide. Q.R 3-1 Goals and Actions: The school leader was found to set well-aligned goals, that target data defined school needs, and has focused school-wide instruction in order to meet the goals. As a school we will be focusing on three areas. Q.R. 1-2 To continue to expand student ownership through student questioning and Socratic-style, student led discussions, especially in early childhood classrooms, to ensure greater consistency of engagement school-wide. Providing students with visual supports and the opportunities for meaningful discussion is a research based means of enhancing language growth for ENL's Q.R. 3.4 To reflect on and work with staff to intensify the level of expectations shared by teachers as demonstrated by their own use of academic language within the classroom and their standards for student writing. Developing school-wide expectations in these already targeted areas will serve to expand student use of language and their understanding of scholastic success. 2  Q.R 4.2 To prioritize inquiry in both vertical and horizontal teams with a focus on student writing. By utilizing student work as the data to analyze, teacher teams can collaboratively assess and define student needs and target these needs at each specific grade level. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 15K001 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1294 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 52 50 47 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 47 33 50 48 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 84.0% % Attendance Rate 82.1% % Reduced Lunch 42.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 86.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.54 1% 15% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 31.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 82% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A NO YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 142 139 48 94.4% 0.6% 17.0% 0.8% 8.7% 0.3% 6 3% 8.9 34.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A NO N/A NO NO N/A YES N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Comprehensive Assessment According to the 2017-2018 Principal's performance review , one area of strength is in ensuring that the curriculum is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Our curriculum maps also showcase planning that address the needs of diverse members of our community. Teachers have access to materials that highlight different learning styles. However, as indicated in the graph below the domain 3 (Instruction) as it pertains to ELLs or Sp Ed ELLs, is the area in need of focus. As a whole, staff is able to plan lessons, provide a supportive environment and seek professional opportunities, but it has limited impact on student learning. June 2018 ELA ISR Summary Lit Standards Summary Info Standards reading summary writing to sources Summary Grade 3 56% Grade 4 Grade 5 June 2018 Math ISR 49% 53% 48% 50% 49% 57% 53% strand Geometry Measurement Number & Operations Base 10 Number and operations fractions Operations and Algebraic thinking 54% 56% 53% 53% 49% 51% 55% 56% 41% Grade 3 Grade 4 Grade 5 63% 47% 40% 54% 57% 77% 5  2018 4th Grade Science Exam Student Group Total Tested Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 General Education Students 4 26 42 (no IEP) Students with Disabilities Percentage out of 73 14 1% 3 5% 1 36% 58% 8 2 22% 7% 57% 14% 4% 6% 39% 51% Student Group Total Tested Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 3(3%) 6 (7%) 44 (51%) 34 (39%) 4 (4%) 9 (9%) 43 (45%) 41(42%) Boys Girls 87 97 Non-ELL’s ELL’s Student Groups Total Tested Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 1 (1%) 4 (5%) 25 (35%) 43(59%) 3(7%) 5 (11%) 30 (65%) 8 (17%) 0 (0%) 5 (25%) 14(70%) 1 (5%) 1 (3%) 0 (0%) 9 (29%) 21 (68%) 0 (0%) 0 (0%) 1 (50%) 1 (50%) F-ELLS’s SPELL’S F-SPELL’S 73 46 20 31 2 School’s Strengths  Teachers analyze student assessment data to provide actionable feedback to students and teacher teams regarding student achievement levels. Across grades and subjects, assessments result are used to adjust curriculum and instruction School leaders purposefully make decisions to build coherence and promote college and career readiness have resulted in selecting standards based curricula that focus on addressing student needs and accessibility and cognitive engagement for a variety of learners.   The culture of the school communicates high expectations to staff, students and families and provides feedback and support to the entire school community through cycles of professional learning and observation of practice in order to achieve expectations.  Teachers structured professional collaborations using an inquiry approach that promotes shared ownership of the school's goals of using data to inform instructional decisions and focuses on improved student learning towards achievement of goals. Teachers participate in Professional Learning Communities (PLC) has resulted in the majority of teachers adopting instructional best practices that promote rigorous thinking. School’s Needs 6  Our priority need is developing rigorous instruction. Listed below are indicators for our action plan ● Across classrooms, teaching strategies need to provide multiple entry points into the curricula, leading to even engagement in appropriately challenging tasks, in order to demonstrate higher-order thinking skills in student work products and participation in discussions including English Language Learners and students with disabilities. In order to deliver customized instruction for Ells and Sp Ed Ells ● Ongoing formative assessments is needed in Pre K- fifth grade to capture progress towards standards ● Professional development is needed in data driven planning (understanding mastery, and implications for planning and instruction) Professional development is needed in training general education teachers in methods of support for special population of students ● Data analysis opportunities need to be created In order to motivate students and develop their critical thinking skills to move 3’s to 4’s ● we need to integrate more opportunities for self-directed and research-based learning within reading, writing and the content areas ● Professional Development on Universal Design for Learning to support learners with speech and language needs ● Planning and articulation time for Individual Educational Plan and English Language Learner providers and classroom teachers Data Sources: ● MOTP ratings ● Parent survey given in March 2018 ● 2018 ELA and Math Item Analysis ● Analysis of TC Running Records ● Analysis of mathematics end of unit assessments ● Analysis of data ECAM and Math Screeners ● Analysis of 2018 Grade 4 New York City Science Exam (written and performance assessment) ● Analysis of teacher observations (conference notes, checklists) for partnership work, small group work, and independent work ● Professional Learning Surveys 7  ● Report Cards ● Student progress Reports ● Formative Instructional Walks (math & literacy) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will incorporate questioning and discussion techniques in every reading, writing and math lesson that will result in at least 50% of ELL students and SWD performing one level higher as measured by the end of year math and literacy summative assessments. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-based instructional programs Implementation of Journeys Curriculum  Implementation of Go Math Curriculum   Teacher participated in professional lear  PLC Inquiry Cycles  6th Period Professional Development  1-1 Coaching Cycles  Classroom Inter-visition School Intra-visitations  Learning Partners Program  Literacy Collaborative  Informal and Formal Observation Feedback  Learning Walks   Title 1 Before and After School ELA AIS programs for grades 2-5  Title 1 Contexts for Learning Math After-school Program for grades 3-5  Title 3 Saturday Program Grades 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 (Cycle 1)  Title 3 Study Program for grades 1-2 (Cycle 2)  Number Talks PD  Math Task Work Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities and English Language Learners, SIFE students and Sth Students. Using student generated questions to develop a deeper understanding of both the content and the metacognitive skills. (Teachers will use turn and talks with strong , open-ended prompts will be utilized Small groups structured around student data and aligned to Common Core Standards . Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Classroom Sept. 2018- June 2019 School Administration Support Staff Coaches Teachers will oversee activities by conducting learning walks, inter-visitations, data review and observations. Students with Disabilities and ELL groups All students Sept. 2018- June 2019 School Administration Coaches Teachers Will formulate schedule during the school day and during PLC Mondays to analyze data. 9  Providing students with an opportunity to develop math problem solving skills by generating questions based off the problem stem. This helps children develop problem solving skills.. SIFE morning program taught by Literacy Coach and tenured teacher to support their transition to grade level curriculum. Teachers use technology as an interactive tool to provide students with real life experiences in order to develop prior knowledge to support the reading comprehension. Spire program is implemented to support children with special needs to develop fluency skills to improve their literacy skills n/a n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Observations will be conducted to monitor student progress. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Strategies to Increase Parent Involvement Activity Parent Teacher Conferences Parent Engagement Tuesdays Math Workshops Literacy Workshops Title 1 Meeting Fabulous Friday (parents observe classroom instruction) Parent Coordinator Weekly Workshops Parent Trips Day/Evening Informational meetings (ESL, Articulation, Grading Policy, Promotion) Parent Progress Reports/Report Cards After School Homework Help Brooklyn Museum Parent Partnership Facilitators ALL Staff ALL Staff Math Coach and Parent coordinator (PC) Literacy Coach and PC Principal and PC Classroom and cluster teachers Parent Coordinator (PC) Parent Coordinator Administration and Teachers Time line 4 times a year Every Tuesday throughout the year 1-3 workshops throughout the year 1-3 workshops throughout the year September The last Friday of each month throughout the school year Every Wednesday throughout the school year Once a month throughout the school year Four times a year Teachers Once a month Librarian, Teachers and Paraprofessionals Every Tuesday and Thursday from Nov.-March Parent Coordinator Six times a year 0  Center For Family Life Homework Help Class Dojo as an informational tool to inform parents of literacy and math strategies CBO Staff Mon-Friday from Sept to June Teachers All school year as needed Extended Library Hours Librarian and Para Tuesday and Thursday throughout the year Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Per Diem for inter and intra visitations  Per Diem for teachers to attend workshops (LPP and Literacy collaborative meetings) ● Literacy and Math Consultants and Journeys ● Literacy and Math Coaches (In-House) ● Supplies. (Furniture) ● Per Session Pay For Inquiry Core Facilitator Team ● Subscriptions for Web Based Resources ● Per Session Pay for After School Programs Per Session for Extended Library Hours Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1  By Feb 2019, teachers will incorporate questioning and discussion techniques in every reading, writing and math lesson that will result in at least 30 % of ELL and SWD student performing on level higher as measured by the midyear ELA/Math summative assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Running records ELA and Math Benchmark Assessments ECAM/Math Screeners Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey are priority needs is: Priority need is to ensure that all members of the school community will work to support the whole child: socially, emotionally, culturally, linguistically and academically. Strengths Structure and organization of the classroom environment supports student learning and independence. Scaffolds are provided for students with disabilities and ENL students to promote success on tasks.    Teachers promotes a risk free environment that allows for student voice.  Students are provided with opportunities to work independently, in small group or in a large group based on student need.  Opportunities are provided for students to engage in cultural events that support their diverse backgrounds.  Guidance counselors meet with a select group of students to train them on conflict resolution.  Principal has devised a student council in grades 3-5 that meets monthly to discuss students concerns and improvement plan.  Celebrating student's acts of citizenship and through the Rock star initiative  Acknowledging good attendance practices monthly and yearly  Teachers provide students opportunities to self reflect and self regulate their choices and adjust accordingly.  Students feel safe. Area of Need Identify tools and supports that will assist an ENL and/or SWD student to address challenging content.   Obtaining research based structures for students who have difficulty with focusing and attention issues.  Consistent attendance practices that will promote students to come to school daily and on-time.  Establishing an environment that will promote student to student collaboration and conversation around student work. Students need be able to identify their strengths and areas of need to improve student learning.   Parents bring their children late to school and take them home early,.  Students are absent on a continuous basis. 3  The policies, practices, and structures that are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child:  Students in grades 2-5 participate in student council once a month to advise principal of their concerns and solutions on how to improve school climate.  One student from the student council attends the D.15 Diversity committee with the guidance counselor.  All students participate in a monthly assemblies to learn about the seven habits and to celebrate students who have demonstrated 7 Habit practices.  Teachers conduct weekly 7 Habit lessons.  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will receive effective and higher in creating an environment of respect and rapport that will result in at least 50% of the ELL students performing one proficiency level higher on the listening and speaking component of the 2018/2019 NYSESLAT exam. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Teachers will engage students in small group instruction  Teachers will analyze data and plan small group Bottom third. Sept. 2018 to Teachers instruction. All teachers  Teachers will discuss students at risk and supports that can be provided during meetings with administration and AIS team. Students at risk June 2019 Teachers, coaches and administrators  Teachers will inform guidance counselors of excessive lateness and attendance and devise a plan to improve attendance and lateness.  Attendance Team analysis data and devise a plan for school wide improvement  Teachers will incorporate the Seven Habits lessons in order to promote a supportive environment.  Teachers will create a classroom environment that reflects students cultures and backgrounds.  Teachers will create an environment where students feel comfortable taking risks  The Lighthouse committee will meet to plan 7 habit lessons, professional development and assemblies. School community will engage in monthly spirit days. Lowering class size by having ELL teachers support classroom teachers    Partnering with Cook shop to support ELL student. Teachers and administrators Guidance and Teachers Guidance, Teachers Administrators Paraprofessional SAPIS Worker AIS teachers Lighthouse Committee (select teachers) 5  Title 1 after school programs will be developed to Oct. 2018 to support students in ELA and Math.  Title 3 before and after school programs will support Bottom Third May 2019 Administration and teachers.  students with limited English and SIFE students. Saturday Academy will provide support to SIFE and ENL students.  Attendance Committee to study patterns of lateness and ENL students chronic absences.  Materials are translated to students native language to support ELL students Leader In Me Program and Assemblies Student Leader Recognitions Spirit Days Student Council      5th Grade Safety Ambassadors   BOKS Program.  Center For Family Life Beacon Program   Cyberbullying lessons  Monthly Safety Meetings Sapis Social Skills Group Lutheran Mental Health Services All Students ENL students All Students Administration, guidance counselors and teachers Translation Committee All staff members n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight.  Activity Parent Engagement Tuesdays Fabulous Friday (parents observe classroom instruction) Parent Coordinator Weekly Workshops on various topics Brooklyn Museum Trips After School Parent and Student Homework Help Brooklyn Museum Parent Partnership Center For Family Life Homework Help Facilitators ALL Staff Classroom and cluster teachers Parent Coordinator (PC) Parent Coordinator Librarian, Teachers and Paraprofessionals Timeline Every Tuesday throughout the year The last Friday of each month throughout the school year Every Wednesday throughout the school year Once a month throughout the school year Every Tuesday and Thursday from Nov.-March Parent Coordinator Six times a year CBO Staff Mon-Friday from Sept to June 6  Class Dojo as an informational tool to inform parents of literacy and math strategies Teachers All school year as needed Parent Volunteers Parent Coordinator Throughout the year based on parent availability. Assemblies to celebrate 100% attendance Pre-K Coffee Hour Parent Town Hall Meeting School Leadership Team Diversity Committee  Administration June Monthly Sept-June Assistant Principal School Safety Committee Once a year SLT Chair person Classroom Teacher Once a month Once a month Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Session for school staff Per Diem for Lighthouse Committee Members Per Diem for school staff OTPS for materials Translation/Interpretation funds. Furniture Non contracted services (Professional development and Trips) Contracted Services (professional development and Trips) Transportation Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 7  By Feb. 2019, teachers will receive effective and higher in creating an environment of respect and rapport that will result in at least 30% of the ELL students performing one proficiency level higher on the listening and speaking as measured by student report card. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Nyseslat Score Classroom discussions ELL report card grades based on CCLS standards Comprehension section of running records Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Comprehensive Assessment Based on our and the 2018 Principal Performance Observation, it is evident that teacher's structured professional collaborations using an inquiry approach that promotes shared ownership of the school's goals of using data to inform instructional decisions and focuses on improved student learning towards achievement of goals. Teachers participate in Professional Learning Communities (PLC) has resulted in the majority of teachers adopting instructional best practices that promote rigorous thinking School’s Strength  Grade level inquiry teams meet every seven weeks to look at student data, to plan instruction collaboratively, and share best practices.  A writing committee was formed to address teachers concerns that the Journeys Curriculum did not provide a methodology to explicitly teach writing conventions.  The teacher committee created structure for teaching writing, which included selecting mentor texts and a common core aligned rubric.  Teachers shared expected outcomes and pacing guides with their colleagues during Monday Professional Learning Time  Advance data demonstrates that the ratings of teacher practice in the instructional domain of Danielson's Framework for Teaching are overall effective.  Teacher Teams consistently analyze assessment data and student work resulting in improved teacher practice and progress toward meeting school-wide, classroom level and individual student goals. The School’s Needs is for teacher's to work collaboratively to support ELL students and students with disabilities meet the next generation common core standards. Based 2018 Principal Performance Observation, across classrooms, teaching strategies need to provide multiple entry points into the curricula, leading to even engagement in appropriately challenging tasks, in order to demonstrate higher-order thinking skills in student work products and participation in discussions including English Language Learners and students with disabilities. 9   Scaffolds for ELLs and students with disabilities are to be consistently implemented across all classrooms to engage students in high levels of discourse.  Engage students in developing critical thinking skills based on multiple resources utilizing technology to develop an interactive curriculum. Students will engage in student to student led conversations   Utilizing student’s IEP present level of performance goals to plan instruction  Utilizing student’s NYSESLAT and NYSITELL data to plan instruction  Using a variety of discussion techniques to develop students oral language.  Utilizing multiple entry entry points to impact student learning Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 95% of the teachers will participate in teacher teams to develop teacher practices that include multiple entry points for ELLs and SWD students as measured by ratings of effective or higher in Domain 3. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Inquiry Teams across grades 1. 2. Learning Partners Program 3. QTEL 4. Sixth Period Collaborative PD cycles in Literacy, Math and Science will be provided to enhance teacher practice. 5. Literacy Collaborative 6. Brooklyn Museum Partnership 7. LEAP 8. PD Training will be provided to teachers on how to incorporate technology in the classroom 9. Classroom inter and intra-visitations will be conducted to enhance student progress. 10. Out of classroom personnel and support staff will collaborate with classroom teachers to support the curriculum and develop student learning. 11. Teachers will meet during Professional Learning Communities on Mondays to look at summative and formative data in reading and writing to reflect, refine and adjust instructional practices in order to deepen the understanding, of the CCLS. Teachers Students Students Students Students Teachers Sept.2018-June 2019 Sept.2018-June 2019 Sept.2018-June 2019Bi-Weekly Sept.2018-June 2019 Administration Coaches Teachers Teachers Teachers Teachers, Out of classroom teachers, support staff Teachers Administration Coaches Administration Teachers Coaches 1   Out of Classroom Personnel meet to collaborate, analyze, discuss IEP's and develop plans to meet student needs.  Response to Intervention Team will identify non-IEP students who are struggling and will develop an intervention plan to support academic growth and track progress.  The School Implementation Team (SIT) will meet to review IEP's and determine whether students academic placement is in the LRE. Students Non-IEP Students Students  ELL, IEP Teacher and Special Education and AIS Service Providers will collaborate to discuss student's IEP and language levels and develop a plan to support student learning. Sept. 2018-June 2019 Monthly Sept 2018-June 2019 Bi-monthly Administration Coaches Sp. Ed. Team ELL Teachers Related Service Provider SIT Committee RTI Team n/a n/a Students n/a  Coaching Cycles n/a n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement n/a n/a n/a How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Activity Time line Translation Services (Written and Verbal) Parent Chaperones for Trips Math Workshops Facilitators Administrators, SAT Team, Guidance, Family Workers, PC, Secretaries and Paraprofessionals Teachers Math Coach and Parent coordinator (PC) Literacy Workshops Literacy Coach and PC Health and Wellness Program Wellness Committee As needed throughout the year As needed throughout the year 1-3 workshops throughout the year 1-3 workshops throughout the year Once a month Sept.-June 2  Attendance Outreach (Class Dojo, Instant Messenger, Phone Calls in parent’s native language) School Staff As needed throughout the year Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Session Activity Per Diem Transportation Translation services Materials Furniture Library Program Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By FEB. 2019, 75% of the teachers will participate in teacher teams to develop teacher practices that include multiple entry points for ELLs and SWD students as measured by ratings of effective or higher in Domain 3. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Ratings in Domain 3 Teacher lesson plans Post observation conference Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Area of strength Based on the 2018 Principal Performance Observation, school leaders have and effective system that uses the Danielson Frame for for Teaching to observe teachers and support their practice through follow up professional learning opportunities, resulting in the adoption of re search-based instructional practices school wide as evidenced by An observation cycle has been created to support teachers Formal observations, along with informal evaluator notes are shared with teachers. A professional development plan is created for teachers based on observation findings. Teachers receive timely actionable feedback as a result of informal instructional walks by school leadership. School leaders communicate expectations of the school's goals and instructional focus on common core across grades and subject areas through a variety of means including email, memorandum, morning messages, grade level meeting, staff meeting and observational feedback. The priority need is for administrators, teachers, parents and students to learn with and from each to develop knowledge of content and practice while providing multiple entry points for our diverse learners. ● Consistent inter-visitation cycles ● Consistent follow up on the impact of professional development on student learning ● Administer specific schedule for Assistant Principals to meet with grade team leaders ● Creating teacher lead professional development activities 4  ● Study group for teachers who work with ELL-IEP’s ● Study group for teachers who work with Bilingual/ESL and Dual Language students Study group for general education teachers on supporting students ENL and SWD students ● Developing teachers to support students in obtaining Levels 3 & 4 in ELA and Math ● Using assessment in instruction Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, professional development cycles of learning will improve teacher practice as measured by 85% of the staff receiving an effective or higher in Domain 3 of the Danielson rubric. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● All teachers will have an initial conference with their immediate supervisor to develop a teacher goal for the year based on their MOTP and MOSL Rating to improve student progress. ● A professional development plan will be created and implemented to support teachers’ goal to increase student progress. ● Administrators will conduct formal and informal observations and provide specific feedback on how professional practices are supporting student progress. Teachers Students Teachers Students Teachers Students September 2018 Administration Administration Sept.- 2018 June 2019 Coaches Administration Mid Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers will have an end of year conference to reflect on their goal and practices developed during the beginning of the school year . ● Teachers will meet during grade wide PLC to study ELA and Math Curriculum. ● Teachers will discuss best practices by videotaping their practice and discussing an essential question that will support instruction. ● Labsites will provide teachers with explicit feedback in support of professional practices. ● Teachers will analyze student formative and summative data to develop a plan for students to impact student learning. Teachers Teachers Teachers Teachers Students Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers Coaches Teachers Coaches Teachers Coaches Students Oct.- 2018 Teachers ● ESL/DL/TBE Study groups will be conducted to identify best practices to increase ELA and Math/NYSESLAT scores. Teachers June 2019 Administration ● Teachers will participate in an inquiry based model to study how to impact student learning for our special needs and ELL students Students Teachers Oct.- 2018 June 2019 Coaches Teachers 6  ● Teachers will meet with their immediate supervisor and have a plan on how supervisors can support their professional learning when working with different populations of learners Teachers Teachers ● Immediate supervisors will be tracking teachers professional learning Teachers Sept.- 2018 June 2019 Ongoing ● Teachers will be selected to attend professional learning that directly correlates with their professional plan as well as the diversity of their learners. ● Professional Learning Communities have been established. Teachers may choose to facilitate or be part of a study group based on teacher need and interest. n/a ● n/a Administration Coaches Teachers Administrators Administrators Administrators Administrators n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Activity Facilitator Parent Monthly Newsletters Teachers Fabulous Friday (parents observe classroom instruction) Parent Engagement Tuesdays (provide parents with feedback on student progress) Classroom and cluster teachers ALL Staff Time line Once a month throughout the year The last Friday of each month throughout the school year Every Tuesday throughout the year 7  Parent Workshops are conducted to provide parents with academic training on how to support student progress. School Messenger automated telephone messages in various languages to inform parents of school activities. PTA Executive Board Meetings School Leaderships Meetings PTA Meetings Parent Coordinator and Teachers On Tuesday or Wednesdays throughout the year Administration and Parent Coordinators As needed throughout the year. PTA President SLT Chairperson PTA President Monthly Sept.-June Monthly Sept.-June Monthly Sept.-June Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Learning Materials Per Session activities for planning and workshops Per Diem to plan inter visitations Per Diem for workshops School Messenger Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By Feb. 2019, professional development cycles of learning will improve teacher practice as measured by 50% of the staff receiving and effective or higher in Domain 3 of the Danielson rubric. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Informal and formal observations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2017- 2018 School Quality Guide, NYSED School Report Card and NYC School Survey the following has been identified:  91% of families say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their children learn  96 % of families say that they get opportunities to visit their children's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child  93% of families say that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit the school.  93% of families say the teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs.  95% of families say that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from the school  98% of families say that their school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. Schools Strengthens  A variety of workshops are provided to parents to support student learning.  Parents are active participants in the school leadership team  The Executive Parent Committee consult with the Principal to support the schools goals.  Collaboration with community organizations and residencies  Parent Trips  Participation in Parent Teacher Conferences  Participation in PTA meetings The school's priority need is to engage all parents understanding the school's curriculum to support student learning.  More opportunities for parent to volunteer time to support their school  Translation services for other than English and Spanish speakers.  Student attendance practices 9  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of all parent meetings will include presentations and/or information sessions facilitated by a community-based organization, community partners or staff members as reported by agendas 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Collaboration with SBOs  Brooklyn Museum Partnerships  Partnerships with the Arts   Leap program Family Day at Brooklyn Museum Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students Oct 2018- June 2019 Administrators  Parent workshops for parents who have children with Parents disabilities  Parent workshops for parents of English Language Learners in their native language Oct.2018- June 2019 Teachers, parent coordinator and administrator Improving Study Skills - 3/27/19 1. 2. Transitioning to the MS - 4/10/19 3. Summer Slide 4/17/19 4. CITE Workshops - 4/1/19, 5/20/19, 6/3/19 5. Kindergarten Math Session 1- Counting - 10/10/18 6. Kindergarten Math Session 2- Problem Solving - 3/22/19 7. 4th Grade Math - Fractional Understanding - 3/13/19 8. 2nd Grade Math - Multiplication - 5/22/19 9. Supporting Kindergarten Readers at Home - 3/6/19 10. Kindergarten: Summer Reading and Writing -5/8/19 11. Reading K and 1 - 11/14/18 12. Writing K - 5 - 11/21/18 13. K Expectations - 12/19/18 14. Writing K - 5 - 2/6  Parent cultural trips  n/a  n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 1  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Partnerships Brooklyn Museum Cook Shop Lion’s Club Cool Culture Common Thread CBO Center For Family Life Brooklyn Army Program NY Langone Dental NY Langone Mental Health Clinic NY Langone Medial Clinic Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. OTPS Per Session Translation and Interpretation Furniture Technology Non- Contracted Services Contracted Services Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 60% of all parent meetings will include presentations and/or information sessions facilitated by a community-based organization, community partners or staff members as reported by agendas. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Meeting Agendas and attendance sheets 2  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Level 1, Level 2 Potential Hold over, no other support services in place, very little or no progress being made Level 1, Level 2 Potential Hold over, no other support services in place, very little or no progress being made Formative/Summative Assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Close reading, I-Ready reading, guided reading, strategy lessons, shared reading, fluency practice, decodable readers, Wilson I-ready math, small group center remedial work, guided practice, running records, independent reading, non-fiction text Small Group Guided Practice small group, one-to-one, Tier I, II, III Intervention, conferences, goal setting Small group, one to one, Tier I, II, III intervention, conferences, goal setting 1-1 Tier 1 Intervention Social Studies Formative/Summative Assessments Small Group Guided Practice 1-1 Tier 1 Intervention During the school day. Before and after school Title I & III After School Programs, Saturday Academy During the school day/and or after school in the form of Title I & III After School Programs, Saturday Academy During the school day. After schooland Saturday Program During the school day. During the school day. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students at risk of school failure. Students with poor attendance and lateness practices. Students who are having difficulty Social skills group, building self-esteem group, conflict resolution. Small group, one-to-one. Class lessons Anti bullying groups Assembly programs. Student council Attendance incentives. Before and after school. 4  Student by student basis. adjusting to the school environment. Student demonstrating difficulty getting along with others Assembly programs. Cyberbullyinglesson Awards for 100%. Rock starannouncements to celebrate citizenship 5  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) In the 2018/2019 school year we have 7 students in temporary housing 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The services we provide students in temporary housing are: School orientation School supplies    Before and after school programs   Counseling services  Extended Library Hours Small group intervention Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 6  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 7  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In an effort to attract and develop high quality teachers to a school such as ours, we refer to organizations whose members are already stakeholders in our school community. We specifically form partnerships with local colleges and universities throughout New York City. We are strategic in our recruitment process for hiring highly skilled teachers. We do this by creating a plan that involves a collaborative team consisting of administrators, consulting with district colleagues, teachers and coaches. These members review resumes, interview possible candidates and observe these candidates conducting lessons in a live classroom setting prior to determining whether or not this person will be hired at PS 001K. Candidates are usually asked to design a lesson and teach it to a class that may be made up of either general education students, English Language Learners students, and/or students with Individual Educational Plans. Additionally, as a way of attracting highly qualified teachers, we have developed outreach strategies that involve finding interested candidates using the New York City Department of Education Open Market Hiring System. They review personal recommendations of candidates made by current PS 001K staff members and other classroom teachers, as well as inviting these potential candidates to visit our school to get a sense of the school culture and to conduct demonstration lessons on site in a variety of content areas, while being observed by an Administrator. Over the years, as part of our plan for attracting and sustaining highly qualified teachers, we have also formed collaborative partnerships such as Teacher's College and Brooklyn College, as well as forming partnerships with alternative license programs like NYC Teaching Fellows. Many of these partnerships have also served as a resource for us in providing professional development for our teachers on a variety of instructional topics. As a school, we are constantly evaluating and revising the hiring process. By using the Department of Education's Open Market Hiring System, we revisit the roles and responsibilities of teachers and communicate the needs of our school with all prospective employees. The expectations at PS 001K and are shared, emphasizing opportunities provided to be lifelong learners. As a school, we encourage our paraprofessionals and student teachers to continue their education, especially in high need areas such as students that are English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. We try to keep an open door policy and welcome all those that are interested and are vested in making sure that our students are ready to meet the standards and go on to be college and career ready. In efforts to retain our teachers we evaluate their licences, area of expertise and grade preferences in order to determine teacher assignments. Teachers partake in an end of year conferences with administrators to review their 8  teaching practices and discuss program assignments. Teachers who are new to the school or to a grade receive a mentor and/or a buddy teacher to support them with their assignment. Prior to the opening of the school year teachers are invited to a new teacher orientation to support them with the curriculum. Ongoing cycles of learning are provided throughout the school year to assist teachers in acclimating themselves to their assignments. Assistant Principals invite new teachers to a monthly breakfast in order to answer any questions or concerns they have encountered throughout the year. To ensure that current staff members become highly qualified, each year we conduct a survey using the Basic Education Data System (BEDS). The BEDS survey is used to determine whether a teacher is considered Highly Qualified within their current assignment. If a teacher is not Highly Qualified based on lack of college credits, efforts are made by the principal to meet with each teacher and develop a plan to help the teacher. New Teachers who are not considered highly qualified are provided a mentor with a minimum of 2 meetings per week. Those teachers considered not Highly Qualified due to the lack of professional development will develop a professional development plan with their immediate supervisor to support the teachers’ professional needs. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). In an effort to provide high quality professional development for staff members in support of students to meet the Common Core Learning Standards, we analyze student data to determine areas of need and create and/or seek the appropriate support based on these trends. We also actively look for and/or create opportunities that enable our teachers to develop a deeper understanding of the Common Core Learning Standards while learning how to provide multiple entry points for students with disabilities and English language learners. Additionally, we meet with teachers to discuss their learning style trends so that we can match teachers to the appropriate professional development offerings. PS1K provides high quality in-house professional development, through our in house math and literacy coaches, as well as utilizing the expertise of outside staff development opportunities through various media. The Superintendent’s Office provided principals and assistant principals with monthly professional development workshops on meeting the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards through the lens of the Universal Design for Learning (UDL), Using Formative Assessment, non-fiction reading strategies and Supporting English Language Learners. In working to support teachers, we offer on-going professional development that meet monthly to support teachers as they work towards getting our students to meet the demands of the CCLS. These workshop series are specifically geared towards new teachers who work with students with disabilities. Additional professional workshops offered by the New York City Department of Education such as Office English Language Learners, Division of Specialized Instruction and Student Support Professional Development are also offered to staff members to meet their students’ needs. The Borough Field Offices offer professional learning activities for principals and assistant principals on a multitude of topics to support the diverse needs of our school population The Leadership and the instructional cabinet will provide full day coaching and demonstration lessons to staff members. Staff developers will be trained in working with Students with Disabilities and ELLs who will facilitate ongoing study groups within our building. These groups, flexible in size and time, have been arranged to support teachers in developing deeper thinking and conversation on supporting struggling students to meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards through refinement of instructional practices. Each study group cycle that provides opportunities for our teachers to see best practices in action, reflect on their instructional practices, learn new methodology, and incorporate newly learned researched techniques as they relate to the needs of our most struggling students which include our English Language Learners and Students with disabilities. Teachers who are not 9  included in the study groups are given access to the notes and materials from the sessions. Additionally, they are encouraged to collaborate during their common planning periods to obtain more information. Literacy coaches participate in these study groups and are available upon request to support all staff members in integrating new methodologies. Teachers/ staff members who are involved in outside professional development workshops are encouraged to turn-key the information they get from their workshops and share it with their colleagues. Notes from workshops are posted within the PS 1 school website connects site so that others may view them. Teachers who are involved in professional development series are invited to facilitate professional learning communities whereby the work is shared, studied and applied across a series of classrooms. Based on a paraprofessional PD survey, paraprofessionals sign up for professional development activities that is aligned with their assignment. Some of the topics offered are working with a child with ADHD, how to support a child with health issues, small group instruction in math, small group instruction in literacy. Professional Development activities are facilitated by school staff and outside sources. Additionally, to ensure all staff members are equipped to access and utilize the resources they need to learn and teach we provide technology training for teachers on the newest data systems, programs, and tools, such as SESIS, Smart Boards, STARS and PS1connects. In order to ensure all of the on-going professional development workshops and professional learning opportunities are improving student outcomes and are applicable to instructional practices, we provide teachers with opportunities to provide feedback through on-line surveys. The data collected enables us to continue to tailor future professional development opportunities to meet the needs of our students through our staff’s learning . Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 0  The transition plans implemented to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program include preparing students for the transition into kindergarten. One of the ways students are supported is by immersing them in a month long unit of study in June in preparation for kindergarten. The unit includes lessons that support children’s transitions, by helping them process their feelings about leaving pre-K and moving on to kindergarten. Students learn the differences and similarities between Pre-K and kindergarten. Through poetry, songs, and read alouds, students are exposed to kindergarten life. Teachers also bring students to visit the main building. Students visit the lunchroom, gym, library, and nurse’s office and kindergarten classrooms. They visit classrooms, observe, and take part in a lesson. The curriculum takes into consideration the amount of time required for a 4-5 year old child to make a successful transition into kindergarten. The dramatic play center is converted into a kindergarten classroom, giving students the opportunity to act out their feelings towards the upcoming changes they will face. Students, who will not be attending the PS1 main building, visit their new school with their parents when they attend kindergarten registration and orientation. All students and parents are engaged in preparation for the upcoming year for Pre-K students. Staff members work collaboratively to ensure a smooth transition. Parents attend an orientation meeting where they meet kindergarten teachers as well as the administrative staff. Parents are invited for classroom tours during the later portion of the school year. As part of a tour, students visit classrooms with their parents so they both can get a glimpse into the elementary school environment. Students come to the lunchroom to eat breakfast and lunch in the main school site. The school social worker, family worker, teachers, paraprofessionals and assistant principal work as a collaborative team to assist in the transition for the students and their families. There are workshops facilitated by the family worker and social worker with topics relevant to transitioning from Pre-K to kindergarten, with a focus on the social-emotional aspect of the transition to kindergarten. In addition, the assistant principal is able to follow student progress and social emotional growth of preschoolers by frequently visiting kindergarten classrooms in the main building the following year. Teachers meet with parents during Parent Engagement Tuesdays in order to collaborate and formulate action plans for children who may face struggles. Kindergarten parents are empowered to support their children as they mature and face the challenges that lay ahead in elementary school. Administration also creates opportunities for staff communication between the main building and the annex. The Pre-K assistant principal helps to build a bridge of cohesion and continuity from Pre-K to kindergarten as part of the transition plan for all Pre-K students. This includes a time where teachers of both grades meet face to face to talk about their incoming students. Students in need of early intervention services are discussed monthly in an intervention meeting. Teachers, guidance counselors, related service providers, parents and administrators devise a 6 week action plan then the plan is revisited to monitor student progress. At that time it is determined of student continues to need more time with the services provided or if a student should be formally evaluated. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. PS1K has a MOSL committee, a PD committee, a consultation committee, instructional committees and an Administrative Advisory committee made up of teachers, paraprofessionals and administrators who review and discuss solutions to school practices. 1  The MOSL committee meets to discuss school data and decide what which measure will be selected to monitor student learning. The PD committee evaluates school professional development practices and suggest the content of future professional learning activities. The Consultation Committee meets with the principal to discuss concerns and present solutions to enhance school functioning. The Administrative committee meets to discuss grade level concerns and solutions to improve teacher practice. The instructional committees plan and facilitate professional learning activities. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A Part 4 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal 905,240. 47,594. 70,990. 0 x x x n/a Section 5C Part4 Section 5D Part 4 Section 5A Part 4 Section 5C Part4 Section 5D Part 4 Section 5A Part 4 Section 5C Part4 Section 5D Part 4 2  Tax Levy (FSF) Local 7.473,407. x n/a Section 5A Part 4 Section 5C Part4 Section 5D Part 4 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another 3  purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Public School 1K, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Public School 1K will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 5  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. Public School 15k001 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Public School 1K will support parents and families of Title I students by: 1. Provide materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their children’s academic achievement.  To teach parents how they can use technology to support their child’s content learning.  We will provide training to help parents select books for their children in our school library and also include a trip to the local public library, as well as using our lending library.  We will provide workshops to educate parents on how to understand IEP recommendations and goals.  We will provide a lending library for all grades and books in different languages.  Coaches will provide workshops that address literacy and math with materials provided to support their child at home.  Parent Coordinator will provide a workshop every Wednesday, providing materials to support their child at home. 1. Provide parent with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children:  We will provide four parent teacher conferences.  Parents will have the opportunity to schedule an appointment and meet with their child’s teacher on a one to one on Tuesdays.  We will provide Curriculum night and Open School week.  We will provide additional meetings with our ELL parents and our Special Education population.  We will also have our Parent Coordinator, family workers, School Based Support Team, Guidance Counselors, and RTI available as needed to address individual concerns and provide suggestions and other options parents can choose from.  Parents will be provided on a monthly basis a Progress Report with the exception of November and March. 6  1. Provide assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments:  Continue working side by side with Teachers  Providing workshops that explain the Core Curriculum and what is expected of our children, what assessments are being used and their purpose . 1. Provide parents with information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in their native language by:  A monthly calendar   Message of the events or workshops taking place are sent via School Messenger Flyer presenting the event 1. Public School 1 will educate its teacher and other staff on how to reach out to communicate with and work with parents as equal partners by:  Provide workshops in literacy and math to build home school links.  Inform parent of the events or workshops that will take place at PS 1 on a monthly calendar and School Messenger in their native language.  Parent Teacher conferences are conducted four times a year.  Provide monthly newsletters, monthly student progress reports and calendars to inform parents of school activities.  A Class Parent Program (Parent Leader is a parent from the class that volunteers his/her time) to build a home school connection and assure there is clear communication between classroom teachers and parents.  Administration Questionnaire given out monthly at PTA Meetings (this allows parents to ask question and share their interests)  All events are offered to Students Pre-K thru Fifth Grade The school's Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I Parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school's Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school's Parent Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality:  Parents are actively involved and engaged the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school's Title I program as outlined in the School comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the School's Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School Parent Compact:  Parents are engaged in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills:  Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the School's Parent Involvement Policy and the School Compact.  Parents are supported and included in school level committees which are the School Leadership Team, the Parent Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing them with technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in leadership skills.  A Parent Coordinator is available to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator provides a workshop every Wednesday based on the needs of the parents of children who attend PS 1 and ensures that the environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will 7  also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.  Workshops are conducted with topics that include: understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services, health and technology training to build parents' capacity to help their children at home.  Workshops/Meetings are held to help the parents understand the accountability system, e.g.,NCLB/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Reports, Quality Review Report and Learning Environment Survey Report.  The Annual Title I Parent Meeting is held on or before December 1st each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school's Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the No Child Left Behind Act.  Parent meetings are scheduled with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening to share information about the school's educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions.  Translation is provided in all documents sent to the parents and interpretation is provided during meetings and events as needed.  Every year Title I Parents are invited to attend a formal presentation or a workshop that address their student academic skill needs and what the parents can do to help. The school will further encourage school level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers  Parents may also volunteer their time in school events such as: Class trips Fundraising Fabulous Friday Lending Library School Mascot Parent Leader Yoga Parent trips coordinated by the Parent Coordinator  providing written and verbal progress reports that are given to parents monthly to keep parents informed of their children's progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  provide a folder for regular written communication between/teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand 8  School-Parent Compact Public School 15k001 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards and Assessments. Public School 1 will: Provide a high quality curriculum and instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment that enables children to meet the State's students academic achievement standards and Assessments by: Send staff to visit Teachers College.  Continue working side by side with Teachers College and their staff developers to.  Continue supporting our teachers by supplying materials and resources needed to deliver proper instruction.  Plan professional development using our school data indicating our students' needs.   Provide time to plan with colleagues and create a learning community.  Continue to provide special programs such as at risk counseling.  Respect cultural, racial and ethnic differences   Provide a high quality instruction in all content areas by highly qualified teachers and when this does not Implement a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards occur, notify parents as required by the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act: Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:  Conducting four parent-teacher conferences which will take place in September, November, March and May in which the individual child's achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related;  Conducting an Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the School's Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved;  Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing(if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting:  Provide parents with information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in their native language by:  A monthly calendar   Messages announcing event or workshop via School Messenger in their native language Flyer presenting the event  Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child's education by giving or sending all correspondence in their native language and interpretation services provided depending the language needed via staff, telephone hotline or The Big Word translation services.  The Annual Title I Parent Meeting is held on or before December 1st each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school's Title I funded program(s), their right to be 9  involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the No Child Left Behind Act.  Providing parents time to meet with all teachers on an appointment basis in order to be informed to pertinent individual school information, assessment results and performance profiles  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. P. S. 1 will provide parents reasonable access to staff by:  Appointment scheduled on any Tuesday during the hours of 2:45 - 3:20 and during parent-teacher  conferences. Special circumstances, coverage can be provided and additional staff can be requested to participate in these meetings  A letter from the Principal is sent home, notification of this procedure is in the Parent Handbook of PS 1, the monthly calendar always includes a note reminding the parents that Tuesdays is always a day available to schedule an appointment.  Parents are offered the opportunity to be the class Parent Leader.  Activities are planned out monthly and sent to parents in the monthly calendar(example:, the present month is January , February calendar will be sent home via backpack last week of January ), announcements are made at the PTA meetings and major events are posted on the sign outside PS 1 building. P. S. 1 will provide general support to parents by:  creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians;  Meetings/Workshops will be scheduled at times that the majority of parents can attend to assist the parents in understanding academic achievement standards, assessments and how to monitor their child's progress. Some Workshops offered to Parents throughout the year: (Pre-K thru 5th Grade invited) Math Building Study Habits at Home Reading Parenting Skill Understanding Types of Learning Disabilities Vocabulary activities to build academic language for English Language Learners Nutrition Workshops (PS.1 Wellness committee in collaboration with Lutheran Hospital sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication. collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parental involvement are utilized to implement activities as   described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy: advising parents of their right to file complaint under the Department's General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the No Child Left Behind Title I requirement for Elementary Secondary Education Act (ESEA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities:  monitor my child's attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and /or discuss what my child is reading each day(for minimum of 15 minutes);   0  set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;   promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child's school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child's education;  communicate with my child's teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and /or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school's Parent Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g. Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   Student Responsibilities:       attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 1  School-Parent Compact (SPC) Public School 1K , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Elementary and Secondary Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 1. ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2. ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 3. ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 4. ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; 5. ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents when out of compliance with the Section 118 of Title I. 6. using data to inform instruction on a consistent basis Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences and workshops. Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 3  ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: We will be using a number of different assessment types to determine which students are most in need of additional support. These assessments include: Teachers College running records, New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) scores, New York State English Language Arts and Math assessments (grades 3-5), and Spanish language assessments for students in Transitional Bilingual Education and Dual Language programs. According to analysis of this data, will be schedule our Title 3 programs. In addition, specific analysis of our students’ NYSESLAT data has shown that of the four modalities tested (reading, writing, listening, speaking) our main areas of concern are reading and writing. As we do anticipate growth our data history indicates we will need to continue to focus on these areas. Our English Language Learners are being held to the same high expectations and standards outlined in the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) as their non-ELL peers. In order for our students to be successful and meet these high expectations and standards they need targeted instruction in all four modalities: listening, speaking, reading and writing. To ensure that our ENL students meet college readiness skills and acquire proficiency in English, all lessons in our Title III programs will support the students' oral language development, writing and literacy skills. Our ENL students will be supported through the use of sentence starters, Total Physical Response, visuals and Relia. These scaffolds will be implemented to make the content comprehensible and attainable for our students. The ENL students will gain the knowledge and skills to tackle these higher-order comprehension skills and develop an understanding of both fiction and non-fiction texts. In addition, student's will strengthen their oral language skills by explaining their reasoning through the use of academic language. Our goal is to prepare our students to think and read critically, communicate strongly both orally and in writing, and solve complex problems. In all three programs, students will be in a class size of ten to fifteen students. An English Language Learner Saturday Academy will be offered. It will consist of students from grades 1-5, with two groups per grade. The average group size will be 14 students per group. The focus of this program for all grades will be supporting students in making academic gains in their reading levels, showing growth in the New York State English Language Arts and New York State Math exams (grades 3-5), and attaining proficiency on the NYSESLAT exam (grades 1-5). Across the grades we will have different methods of instruction and material support. SAT Academy Instruction: Grades 1-2 small group instruction, guided reading, shared reading, phonemic awareness, and word study. Progress monitoring: running records, in the beginning of the cycle, and at the end of all three cycles. Grades 3-4-5 Iready, small group instruction, guided reading, and word study. Progress monitoring is the IReady differentiated levels, and the running record. In addition there will be math instruction with the IReady and the progress monitoring are the level screeners, and the levels within the IReady. iReady is a computer based program that uses a diagnostic assessment for students and supports the teacher in providing data-driven, differentiated instruction will support student in their literacy areas of need. The Saturday Academy program will meet on Saturdays from October 13 to May 18 for approximately 22 sessions per class. The Saturday Academy will have two sessions per day: 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 9:00 AM-10:30 AM and 10:45 AM-12:15 PM. It will take place over the course of three cycles, each six weeks in length. The Early Bird morning program will meet four times per week, Monday through Thursday from November 5th to June 5th for a total of approximately 52 sessions. The early morning program will meet from 7:30 AM to 8:10 AM. It will take place over the course of three to four cycles, each six weeks in length. Early Morning Program: The early Morning program will be available for students in grades 3, 4, and 5. This program will focus primarily on students from Dual Language and Transitional Bilingual Education classes who require extra assistance in the New York State English Language Arts and Math exams. Students will be identified for this program based on consistent lack of progress on assessments such as teacher-administered benchmarks, reading level running records, and math screeners. There will be two classes per grade, and approximately 8 -10 students. The morning program will consist of three to four cycles, each of six weeks in length. The first six-week cycle will be dedicated to intensive intervention. Students will be re-assessed at the end of each cycle to determine progress and may continue or discontinue depending on progress made. SIFE Support- Morning Program: Two morning groups will be designed to provide instruction to address the specific needs of SIFE. Our SIFE are identified as incoming ELLs in the Entering and Emerging levels who are in grades 3, 4, and 5 and are two or more years below grade level in literacy and /or math in their home language. These sessions will be taught by teachers with a TESOL license or Bilingual extension, and instruction will include support in the students’ home languages. SIFE students will be supported during the morning program. We will have a bilingual teacher supporting students we have a group of six SIFE students. The SIFE group will be using Imagine learning program in the morning. The SIFE group will be with cycles within the program. The program will begin in November 2018. The additional Early Morning ELL program will provide support to students in grades 1 and 2. The program will run from 7:30 AM to 8:00 AM, on Wednesdays and Thursdays. There will be four classes, two on each grade. The materials students will use is phonic awareness, guided reading and shared reading. Two Certified ENL and 2 certified Bilingual teachers will support students and maintain data to monitor their progress with language acquisition. The program will begin beginning of November through May 2019, for approximately 52 sessions. .Positions will be offered first to teachers serving under a TESOL or Bilingual license. (If we are unable to secure the needed amount of licensed ENL and Bilingual teachers, a common branch teacher will be hired and a co-teaching model will be utilized). A one hour planning meeting per cycle will be provided for teachers to plan for instruction, group students, and review student data. A supervisor will be present to assist in planning, provide support in modeling effective practices, and assist in grouping students. Agenda's will be made, and attendance will be taken during the meetings. All classes will have instruction provided in English with appropriate supports for English language learners. Home language/native language support will be provided by the bilingual teacher. Our goal is to prepare our students to think and read critically, communicate strongly both orally and in writing, and solve complex problems. Materials that will be used to achieve these goals are: leveled literacy guided reading kits; Imagine Learning (especially for SIFE, Newcomers, Entering or Emerging students), an ENL technology-based program; and iReady; a computer-based, leveled-learning program for grades 3-5. In addition, Ready New York books will be used to support students with math. ELL students will be supported in using these materials through the use of: sentence starters, Total Physical Response (TPR), visuals, and Realia. These scaffolds will be implemented to make the content being studied comprehensible and attainable, thereby increasing students’ independence. With the aid of these supports, ELL students will gain knowledge and skills to tackle complex texts. In addition, students will strengthen their oral language skills by explaining their reasoning through the use of academic language. 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: This year we will continue to focus on our professional learning that will improve our ENL students in their English Language acquisition in order to increase their scores in ELA, Math, and NYSESLAT exams. In order to prepare students for these challenges teachers must be given the opportunity to engage in rigorous planning and collaboration with colleagues. Our goal is to provide quality training and staff development to all instructional and support personnel. This will lead to improved teaching and student learning in all subjects. Ongoing training will be provided to teachers of ENL students in the use of supportive instructional strategies, methods and techniques that will support ENL students. In addition, we will fund an opportunity for teacher professional learning. In addition, an after-school study group will be offered to teachers to support our bilingual and dual language programs. The agenda's and the sign in for staff will be held by the Assistant Principal The participants will be invited we expect between 8-10 staff members The following topics will be addressed during staff development in the 2018-19 academic school year: · &nbsp;(provided by BFO) · · (provided by ENL teachers)&nbsp; · (provided by ENL teachers)&nbsp; · · · by literacy coaches)&nbsp; · · of Ell's) · discretion Teachers will be granted the opportunity to participate in DELLS workshops focusing on aligning instruction with the Common Core Standards at no cost. Agenda's and attendance kept by the supervisor of the program. The minutes of the Meetings will be kept on a google document to have the team have access Universal Design for Learning for all students (provided by our partnership with Q-tel) Preparing students for the &nbsp;NYSESLAT&nbsp;(provided by ENL teachers)&nbsp; Using language goals in all content areas to meet the Common Core Standards (provided Small group instruction utilizing DATA (provided by coaches)&nbsp; Inquiry How to better support our ENL students in writing &nbsp;(provided by teachers Danielson's&nbsp;Framework for Teaching - Discussion and Questioning -Use of Thinking Maps in the content areas (provided by literacy coaches) -Analysis of data and progress of our ELLs&nbsp;utilizing the Data Analysis Tool -English as a Second&nbsp;Language Resources using Engage New York-video clips NYSABE, conference for about five ENL staff (provided by NYSABE) and Principal's 8  Part C: Professional Development Professional learning will occur throughout the academic school year and/or during scheduled professional learning meetings/Monday's and Tuesday's. Trainings may occur during monthly grade meetings, lunch/prep periods and or during ENL program meetings. Additionally, teachers will be given the opportunity to attend city-wide conferences addressing the needs of our ENL students. This will be at no cost to the program. The cost of the conference would be the only cost to the program. The school would pay for four ENL/Common branch teachers to attend. (this would be tentative upon principal's discretion due to coverages.) Tentative dates for the academic school year September 2018-May 2019 rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: Our school recognizes the importance of parental involvement in the education of all our children. Participation of our ENL parents is on-going. Parent workshops are highly encouraged. Due to our school's demographics all our workshops target ENL parents and translated in Spanish and Chinese. Parents are invited to several parent orientations and information is translated in their Native Language. (English, Spanish and Chinese) Parent letters are also sent out in the Native Language from the NYC DOE website. Our school ensures parents are given letters and flyer's in their Native Language to ensure a high participation rate in parental workshops. Meeting agendas will be kept and parent signature to sign in will be kept for our records by the parent coordinator. There is a lending library for parents facilitated by the Parent Coordinator and our school Family Worker. The library consists of books in Spanish and Chinese. Parents have the availability to take out books daily and exchange books. Parents are able to take books out and read to their children in their own language. In addition, during the Saturday ELL Academy, parents are invited to visit and access our school library. Parents have access to library resources and technology. In addition, the Sunset Park-Brooklyn Public Library provides an on site adult library card registration, reading program for children and parents. PS 1 has partnered with the public library to ensure parents seek out these resources. After assessing the needs of our students, we have determined that our students are challenged in their second language because their parents are non English speakers. In fact, the majority of our students come from homes where the first language is Spanish and most of the activities conducted at home are in the student’s native language. Therefore, we will offer Parent ENL classes. We will hire two ENL teachers to teach parents English. The classes will be from 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on Wednesdays and Thursdays. The program will commence on January 2019 and end on March 2019, it will consist of 10 sessions. The program would focus on adult 9  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities themes, conversation and socialization. We will have field trips and community walks to immerse the parents with environmental print and provide opportunities for them to practice oral language development. We will purchase instructional materials to support the program including picture cards, and books to help scaffold the instruction. Our school will provide child-care for the parents with an Educational Assistant. The Educational Assistant will have the students across the classroom from the parents. Our parents will be notified by invitation, fliers sent home, or by the school messenger. We have a translation committee that will support the parent coordinator as needed to translate in spanish, chinese, urdu, mandarin etc. Parent Workshops: In an effort to educate parents of our bilingual and ENL students, our bilingual teachers will collaborate with the parent coordinator to host a special series of parent workshops. These workshops will be teacher led and provide parents with a practical and theoretical framework for bilingual education, ENL students and Dual Language programs. Workshops in this series may possibly include: “Welcome to Bilingual Education,” “Supporting Readers in Any Language,” “ Math at Home”, and “Testing and the Bilingual Child; your rights and responsibilities”. · · · · · · · · · (At no cost) Flyer's and translation will be provided. All agendas, attendance sheets and invitations are maintained by our Parent Coordinator. Students Literacy Supporting students in math ELL Orientation (at least 2-3 meetings) NYSESLAT Student&nbsp;DATA Login&nbsp;for Student Learning about Parent/School Survey's&nbsp; Homework Support&nbsp; Library Support Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 0  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2. 3. 4. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 15 School Name Bergen School Borough Brooklyn School Number 1 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Arlene Ramos Coach Ms. Tomac ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Rosenberg Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Sheenan/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Koensberg/Spec. Ed. Related-Service Provider Ms. Pinzon Superintendent Anita Skop Assistant Principal Wanda Ramirez Coach n/a School Counselor Ms. Pratt Parent n/a Parent Coordinator Maribel Pina Field Support Center Staff Member M. Ortiz Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 15 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program 11 Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 9 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1322 2 Total number of ELLs 587 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 44.40%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 1 1 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 2 1 1 2 3 1 1 2 2 1 1 2 5 1 0 1 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 6 0 0 5 0 0 11 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Formative assessments in English used to guide instructional planning for ELLs in DL, TBE and Freestanding ENL programs: TC running records 3 times a year (October, January, and May). Pre and post on demand for each writing unit Journeys Benchmark assessments administered weekly Conference notes Exit slips at end of a daily lesson Plickers (technology based assessment) for check for understanding (can be used daily, or to track student growth) 3  Standards Based Concepts of Print assessment for emerging readers High frequency word assessment (emerging readers) Letter sound identification (emerging readers) ECAM assessments Formative assessments in Spanish used to guide instructional planning for ELLs used in DL and TBE classes: ELE El Sol Estrellita DRA (running records in Spanish) Exit slips Conference notes Senderos (Journeys curriculum for Spanish language instruction) Benchmark assessments Spanish Lab (administered within 10 days of admission to the school) Based on the 2016 NYSESLAT summative data English Language Learners need support in writing. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Running records are done 3 times a year and used to guide instruction, and data is entered onto a school wide spreadsheet for accessibility by all service providers. Out of classroom ENL providers support classroom teachers to administer the running records in both languages. Based on assessment results, teachers use data to create small groups for small group instruction. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In order to identify baseline, progress and areas of need, we use the following summative assessments: NYSITELL NYSESLAT ELL Periodic Assessment ELE (Spanish language assessment used for DL and TBE classes in grades 3-5) Spanish Lab ELA state test Math state test 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Structures that we have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered: Students receive appropriate number of minutes of ENL services according to NYSITELL/ NYSESLAT level Small group instruction to provide academic intervention Every day there are 20 minutes allotted specifically for Academic Intervention Services in every classroom from 10:00 - 10:20. Cluster teachers, out of classroom teachers and coaches are all assigned a class and the groups are flexible, created using data collected through assessments. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 4  *The RTI framework is used at P.S. 001 as an instructional model that aims at the intervention and instruction that increase in duration and intensity over time: as students improve, measured by reliable and valid assessment (both the formal and informal, the additional supports are removed. The additional support can take place in the classroom, but also in a separate setting with instruction focused on specific learning targets. The RTI team carefully can analyze the characteristics of each learner, and the views as a language learner as an asset to move forward in instruction. The linguistic capabilities that students bring to the classroom is what could be challenging when students are limited in either language. The RTI Kindergarten through second grade Committee, consists of building administrators, RTI teacher, service providers,ENL teachers, SETSS teacher, and guidance. Each member possess an in depth knowledge of their field. The team has a systematic approach for examining how ENL student background and educational contexts have an impact on their academic achievement in the classroom. The teams meet monthly, to discuss students, discuss progress, and support language development. To refer any students to the RTI, classroom teachers must fill out a form including data on the students and what attempts have been made to support student instruction. Included on the RTI referral form: information to provide a better understanding for the what the student is able to do or not do. Assessment are included whether it is formal or informal. There is a service provider in the team to provide support as the data is analyzed. Teachers work collaboratively when necessary to ensure the success of the implementation of the RTI plan. Data drives all conversation and provides the suggestion for the instruction. Data continues to be drawn with an array of purpose and decisions are made upon the data. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Outcome assessments that are used to evaluate and inform our ELL programs: NYSITELL NYSESLAT Spanish Lab ELA EDAT SIFE Multilingual Evaluation Tool At PS 1 we use the EDAT to analyze data such as: Language Proficiency levels of students including the score for each modality (Listening, Speaking, Reading, Writing) Language proficiency growth from one year to the next Movement in both directions Areas of need students who show a need for intervention due to lack of progress 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In order to disseminate these findings to make adjustments to programs we: Hold grade data meetings to discuss current data as well as next steps during PLC time on Mondays Literacy team meet to discuss data Data specialist/ ELL Coordinator share information to entire school by grade so that all staff so that all staff members have access to data. Data specialist/ ELL Coordinator meet with teachers individually and in groups to discuss findings and next steps. Part IV: ELL Programming 5  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Five Freestanding ENL programs (K-2) Instruction is delivered by a licensed ENL provider in an English only setting. The instruction is delivered through the combination of the Integrated ENL/ELA (Co-teaching), Self-Contained, and Stand Alone ENL (Pull Out) models. The Integrated ENL/ELA (Co-Teaching) model is delivered by the ENL and General Education Classroom teacher. The instruction includes content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. The ENL teacher works in collaboration with the General Education teacher to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. The self-contained ENL model is delivered by a dually certified teacher who delivers all content instruction to both current and former ELLs using ENL strategies for the entire school day. Standalone ENL model is delivered by a certified ENL teacher for ELLs who are on Entering and Emerging proficiency levels. ENL teacher provides one unit of English-acquisition-focused instruction which is aligned with curriculum and ensures continuity of the classroom instruction. The freestanding ENL program follows the journeys program for literacy instruction. Freestanding ENL classrooms follow the Math Number Talks program which promotes rich and thoughtful discussion around a purposely selected math problem. Integrated and standalone ENL instruction are delivered based on proficiency level as per CR Part 154 mandates. Selected by parents on the parent selection form Students are placed in classrooms heterogeneously Groupings are flexible within the classroom setting ENL scaffolds are integrated into daily lessons Turn and Talk partners are grouped homogeneously b. TBE program. If applicable. Six Transitional Bilingual Programs (K-5) Instruction is delivered by a certified common branch teacher with a bilingual extension. The Transitional Bilingual program follows the journeys program for literacy instruction in English. TBE classes use the SENDEROS program for literacy in spanish. Transitional Bilingual classrooms follow the Number Talks program which promotes rich and thoughtful discussion around a purposely selected math problem. In addition, TBE classes are also supported by an ENL provider as additional support above their mandated minutes. Selected by parents on the parent selection form Students are placed in classrooms heterogeneously Groupings are flexible within the classroom setting ENL scaffolds are integrated into daily lessons Turn and Talk partners are grouped homogeneously c. DL program. If applicable. 6  There is one Dual Language classes in grades K, 1 and 2, and 3, allowing students to receive services while maintaining the consistency of a single instructor, which is especially helpful in the all grades. The Dual Language program is a self-contained class, ensuring students whose parents have selected this option have access to this parent selection option. Five Dual Language Programs (K-4) Instruction is delivered by a common branch certified teacher with a bilingual extension. The Transitional Bilingual program follows the journeys program for literacy instruction in English. Dual Language classes use the SENDEROS program for literacy in spanish. DL classrooms follow the Number Talks program which promotes rich and thoughtful discussion around a purposely selected math problem. In addition, DLT classes are also supported by an ENL provider as extra support above their mandated minutes. Selected by parents on the parent selection form Students are placed in classrooms heterogeneously Groupings are flexible within the classroom setting ENL scaffolds are integrated into daily lessons Turn and Talk partners are grouped homogeneously 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We will carefully review the CR PART 154-2 (K-8) English as a New Language (ENL) Units of Study and Staffing Requirements, and program our ELLs accordingly. Thus, for Entering ELLs we will be provided with 360 minutes of instruction with a minimum of 180 minutes of Standalone ENL and 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA. For Emerging ELLs the same 360 minutes of mandated instruction will be distributed as follows: minimum of 90 minutes for Standalone ENL along with 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA with additional 90 minutes of either Standalone or Integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area. For Transitioning and Expanding ELLs we will provide a total of 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA a week. Transitioning ELLs will receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of Standalone or Integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area, while Expanding ELLs will receive a minimum of 180 minutes a week of Integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. Commanding students, who fall into a category of Former ELLs will receive a minimum of 90 minutes a week of Integrated ENL/ELA or other content area for two years, as well as testing accommodations on the NYS assessments. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In our Freestanding ENL program, content is delivered in English with specific ENL strategies and supports. Such scaffolds include: graphic organizers vocabulary front loading videos turn and talks oral pre planning sentence frames visuals, realia 7  Vocabulary development Multiple oral rehearsals Tiered Vocabulary Explicit targeted instruction Total Physical Response (TPR), and various methods of exposure of content, such as video and as much hands on experience as possible. Home language support is offered when possible. In our Dual Language program, content is delivered in English 50% of the time and Spanish 50% of the time. In the Dual Language program, classroom teachers provide content instruction in the target language at the outset of the year. As students grow in proficiency, they begin to have core curriculum classes in the target language, and receive some content instruction in their native language to ensure they are receiving exposure to content area material in both their native and target language. To execute this plan, a side-by-side model is employed, with students interchanging based on the teacher's’ professional opinions (and the requirement of a 50/50 language distribution). Students are also given ample opportunities for oral rehearsal, capitalizing on the benefits of “turn-and-talks” with language partners (often partnering more proficient students with students who can use additional language models). Making use of increased opportunity for conversation also aligns with Common Core Learning Standards, whose Speaking and Listening standards require that students participate in routine collaborative discussions (Standard 1). However, the class maintains pace with General Education classes to ensure students are meeting the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. graphic organizers vocabulary front loading videos turn and talks oral pre planning sentence frames visuals, realia Vocabulary development Multiple oral rehearsals Tiered Vocabulary Explicit targeted instruction Total Physical Response (TPR), and various methods of exposure of content, such as video and as much hands on experience as possible. Home language support is offered when possible. In our Transitional Bilingual program, content is delivered in the target language, English, with home language supports. In the bilingual program, classroom teachers provide content instruction in the target language at weighted percentages based on proficiency (i.e. Entering students receive more instruction in their native language) as outlined in question 2. As students grow in proficiency, their exposure to content material in the target language increases. Further, teachers are able to use native language support when needed based on the principles of language transference. graphic organizers vocabulary front loading videos turn and talks oral pre planning sentence frames visuals, realia Vocabulary development Multiple oral rehearsals Tiered Vocabulary Explicit targeted instruction 8  Total Physical Response (TPR), and various methods of exposure of content, such as video and as much hands on experience as possible. Home language support is offered when possible. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish speaking ELLs are administered the Spanish Lab after the initial English NYSITELL. Based on the score, it is determined what level of proficiency the student has in their native language. This information is kept on file and shared with students’ instructors. All students in bilingual classes on upper grades then take the ELE test in their Spanish to monitor their growth in proficiency from previous years. We also use local measures to track students’ native language growth. Bilingual and Dual Language classes test students with the Spanish language DRA (ELD) to determine students’ reading levels in their native language. This allows teachers to track student reading progress in their native language throughout the year and this data used to inform instruction. Bilingual and Dual language classes also receive mathematics assessments in their native language to track growth. Bilingual and Dual Language classes publish writing pieces in their native language (in addition to producing target language pieces). The native language writing is scored against a school-wide rubric to track growth in conventions and composition in the native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status P.S. 001K has a large ELL population so it is essential that we differentiate our instruction for our various ELL subgroups. To that end, the school has several different instructional plans for each subgroup. SIFE After administering the HLIS, the NYSITELL, and Spanish Lab (if applicable), if there is reason to believe that the student is possibly SIFE, we administer the SIFE Oral Interview Questionnaire and the Multilingual Literacy SIFE Screener (in student’s home language). The results are shared with the classroom teacher and supplemental ENL services are provided by an out of classroom teacher when possible. We differentiate instruction for SIFE students using the following: iReady Imagine Learning AIS support Wilson/ Fundations RAZ Kids Saturday Academy b. Newcomers (in U.S. less than 3 years)Newcomer ELLs are identified immediately by interviews conducted on the HLIS. Once identified, students are tested using the NYSITELL within the first 10 days. All Spanish speaking Newcomers are also given the Spanish Lab within the 10 day window. Additionally, all Spanish speaking- newcomers are assessed using Spanish DRA (EDL) to determine their native language literacy level. Students are placed in bilingual settings if parent chooses and space is available. All teachers in grades 2-5 are asked to develop educational plans for newcomers to ensure they are fully engaged in each element of the day. Audio-visual or small group activities may be used as long as they can be shown to build language, rigor, and capacity for the newcomer ELL. The Literacy Coaches provide support, training, and resources for teachers to ensure 9  newcomers make a swift transition into their new settings and become a active member of their classroom community. Additionally, out of classroom ENL staff maintain resources that can be used for Newcomer students (i.e. personal dictionaries, vocabulary journals, etc.). All newcomer students are serviced in extended day in one of our newcomer groups that focus on oral language and listening comprehension. Newcomer students in grades K-2 may be offered play therapy sessions in our Primary Project if deemed beneficial by the teachers and parents. All newcomer students will be offered a Title III after school opportunity and will use the Into English- program to build confidence, oral language, and early writing skills. Newcomer ELLs across all grades are given an Imagine Learning account to support their growth in English vocabulary, grammar and comprehension. Imagine Learning is a computer program that tracks student progress as they learn essential aspects of English. Newcomer ELLs are able to continue with this program for as many years as needed in support of their English language development. IReady serves as a common center-based activity for Newcomer ELLs, where students are supported, wherever they are in their level of language. Further, newcomer ENL students in grades 2-5 will be offered a 6 week cycle program that focuses on building language across the four modalities. Newcomers who will be expected to take the ELA will be offered weekly supplemental intervention and a spot in the 6 week Title III after-school program. In addition, SAT academy using iReady online program that supports students regardless of language level. c. ELLS (4-6 years)ELLs are serviced in a TBE, Freestanding ENL, or Dual Language program based upon parental selection. ELLs who select ENL services are placed in the ENL class or in one of our general education Language enrichment (LE) classes (which uses a co-teaching model, with one general education teacher and one ENL certified teacher). These classes have a higher population of evenly leveled ELLs. Teachers and ENL service providers work closely to ensure instruction is scaffolded and collaborate closely on curriculum and co-teaching opportunities. Co-teaching models include parallel teaching and station teaching to ensure small group and targeted instruction. Within each program, rigorous instruction is planned to help students meet their language and literacy goals. As part of our goals we will develop both languages through creating social and academic structures within the classroom. We will practice accountable talk within the literacy block and content learning time. Students will learn to give feedback from their academic learning and apply specific language structures in their responses. We will provide students the ability to work with students of other classes to challenge their thinking and language development. They can work on inquiry projects, strategically grouping them with students of other language levels. In grades 3-5, teachers embed best practices in test preparation throughout the day and the year to help our ELLs on the ELA and NYSESLAT exams. In grades K-2 , a variety of vocabulary and phonics structures are used such as the anthology of "Journey's", an anchor text, independent reading, and small group instruction to help students prepare for the NYSESLAT. The teacher works with small groups to lessen the ratios of student to teacher and may chose to incorporate the students’ native language into instruction. Teachers will use a variety of programs to support language development including but not limited to Language Power and Journey's program in Spanish, Senderos. All ELL students in grades 2-5 will be included in the Title III after- school program that focuses on strengthening language skills across the four language modalities. The program is specifically aimed at helping our students prepare for the ELA, Math, and NYSESLAT exams. If funds are available, ELL students will also be included in a Title III summer school program. Within the self- contained ENL classes, small group reading and writing intervention will be provided by our AIS and Intervention staff members.All entitled ELLs receive state mandated amounts of ENL or native language arts hours based on proficiency level and program model. All ELL testing modifications are observed for all forms of standardized assessment including predictive and practice exams d. Long-term ELLs (6+ years)While P.S. 001K does not have many LTEs (6 + years), in order to address the needs of any potential members of this population, we have several interventions, programs, and policies in place. Through the use of electronic data systems STARS, and the EDAT, teachers are able to easily identify students with longer than 6 years of service. Long Term ELLs (LTE-6 completed years) are included in our Extended Day program which focuses on small group math and literacy instruction. All attempts are made to assign a Bilingual, ENL, or Reading intervention staff member for ELLs in the extended program to better address the specific language needs of the population. LTE students ( 6+years) in grades 4-5 receive pull out reading intervention throughout the week from our Intervention and AIS staff members. Small group instruction is focused around decoding and comprehension skills. Instructional time is used to scaffold and support the grade level instruction. LTEs will be included in a 10 week Title III after school program focused on the literacy skills needed for grade level comprehension, expression, and testing. LTEs receive state mandated numbers of ENL or bilingual service hours based on the proficiency level and program model. Additionally, each student receives an extension of service as per part 154. 0  e. Former ELLsFormer ELLs are identified via NYSESLAT test results from the previous year. Former ELLs are placed in our general education Language Enrichment (LE) classes. These classes have clustered current ELLs, as well as non-ELLs. The LE classes serve as an appropriate setting for Former ELLs as LE classes are served by out of classroom ENL instructors. These ENL instructors work with the classroom teacher via the co-teaching model for the mandated periods based on the needs of the current ELLs. As the ENL teacher is providing support for the class' current ELLs, they are also able to provide support for Former-ELLs who need 90 minutes per week according to CR Part 154. General education teachers and ESL service providers work closely to ensure instruction is scaffold and collaborate closely on curriculum and co-teaching opportunities. Through models such as parallel teaching and station teaching, Former ELLs are able to benefit from smaller group sizes and more targeted instruction. ENL push-in instructors allow for flexible grouping when addressing the needs of the students in the class; if a Former ELL is struggling with a strategy or topic, they are able to benefit from the ESL instructor's expertise and support depending on their current needs. However, by entering a general education class, they are also able to benefit from the language models of native English speakers. Former ELLs receive the required testing modifications on both predictive and practice exams (entitlement of time extension for two years after scoring Commanding on the NYSESLAT). Former ELLs are identified and tracked from the outset of the year by classroom teachers, coaches and the Data Specialist to ensure that 2 years of 90 minutes per week of ENL services are provided by a certified teacher of TESOL. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our school ensures that all ELL-SWDs whose IEP mandates ENL instruction receive appropriate services. Teachers access SESIS regularly and meet with special education teachers to design instruction that support students' individual IEP goals. Classrooms with ELL-SWDs contain a variety of materials that support instruction. These include, math manipulatives, magnetic letters and letter tiles, audiobooks, music and educational games. Technology is also utilized, for example, laptop accessibility, hands-on programs available on Smartboard technology, and the use of document readers/projectors. Our ELL teachers use many instructional strategies and grade level materials that provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development. We strongly adhere to the UDL philosophy. Teachers differentiate content, process and product. We differentiate content by: modifying texts supplemental curricula using multimedia resources collections of themed books, fiction and nonfiction picture books graphic organizers charts with visuals and models of writing tasks bilingual materials and varied pacing for different learners Process is differentiated through step by step displayed directions, rubrics and checklists, visuals and models of note-taking that appeal to all learning styles, drawing to express ideas, flexible grouping, audio books for newcomers and through social language models. Finally, we differentiate product by establishing different formats. These include written tasks (standard reports, essays, stories, maps, diagrams etc.), verbal tasks (oral presentations, interviews, etc.), performance based tasks (role play) and creative tasks (painting, drawing, graphs, models, dioramas, etc.). ELL students with disabilities whose IEP recommends ENL or bilingual instruction will receive intensive support by our ENL instructors in their classrooms to facilitate their reading, writing and language skills in order to meet their IEP goals. The classroom teacher uses specialized reading programs, such as Fundations for grades K, 1 and 2 and Wilson and Imagine Learning for grades 3, 4 and 5 (1 period) during the morning block. Classroom teachers collaborate with ENL teachers, SETSS and Speech providers to differentiate instruction to meet the individual needs of Special Education ELLs. Students with IEPs 1  participate in daily small group instruction modified to meet individual student needs. Cluster teachers, as well as ENL specialists, have been trained to navigate SESIS where they can access students’ goals and make instructional accommodations according to the students’ learning needs. Our policy for special needs students also includes: Ensuring that all teachers of students with an IEP are familiar with students’ particular needs and all services are provided accordingly to the IEP mandates. Monitoring of newcomer, long term ELLs and SIFE student for possible special needs status. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? If a student requires a smaller setting (i.e. 12 to 1, Integrated Team Teaching), those mandates are honored and they receive their ENL services via a integrated model with an ENL instructor. Students without this requirement (i.e. SETTS, speech) are placed into a program based on the initial Parent Selection form, with their special education instructor integrating services within the classroom setting for support. This assures that ENL-SWD are placed in the least restrictive environment possible, while honoring both their IEP requirements and ENL mandates. By enforcing the integrated model for all service providers, students are better positioned to achieve their IEP goals, as they are able to receive both the support of a special education certified instructor and a trained language specialist (whether they be the classroom teacher or out of classroom provider). Further, by encouraging teachers to work closely together, specialty instructors are able to create fine-tuned educational plans for their students. This communication ensures that language goals and IEP goals are aligned and executed in a way that helps students achieve improved language proficiency while keeping the needs of their disability in mind. Further, instructors are able to work together to consider various ways to scaffold the curriculum to simultaneously help students meet their goals while growing in English proficiency. Beyond co-planning, each grade has a Literacy Committee that will interpret the new assessments via Journey's or Senderos and adds different scaffolds and supports to the curriculum map to analyze teachers of students with ENLs and ENL-SWDs of potential pathways. Each Literacy Committee has a "specialist" team member, whose job is to ensure these scaffolds help all students are able to access grade-level curriculum. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELL students are eligible for a variety of intervention activities designed to target ELA, Math, and Content Areas. Intervention Services are offered to ELLs at various times throughout the year, before school, and after school, through Title 3 funds. Support for students is also garnered via development of ENL and bilingual staff. The ENL and bilingual teachers meet periodically with Literacy coaches to discuss standards, scaffolds, and alignment to school curriculum expectations. To support ELL students in testing grades, additional units have been included in the reading and writing calendar. These units contain test taking skills and strategies. Materials have been ordered to support the delivery of instruction during the school day and in after-school programs. Professional development opportunities have been provided for teachers, and workshops for parents, to familiarize them with the content, and strategies for success. Materials have been purchased to support the reading and writing units of study and are appropriate to meet the need of all students, particularly ELLs. In addition, our school Robin Hood Library is a resource, and provides teachers and students with a wide range of genres that are age appropriate, and culturally relevant. In order to support our large ELL (4-6 years) and Former ELL population, all teachers are provided with professional development opportunities geared toward scaffolding the curriculum and creating materials and structures that build oral language, which informs writing. As was previously mentioned, many Former-ELLs are mainstreamed into general education classes (where they receive the benefit of a strong language models with the support of a co-teacher trained in ESL during mandated periods) when it fits their learning needs. Current ELLs are invited to attend after-school programs to support their growth in ELA and Former ELLs are invited to attend a similar after school program funded through Title I to help prepare them for Math and ELA exams. 2  Additionally, our level 1 ELLs and Former-ELLs are considered for At Risk Interventions with AIS reading specialists. Teachers supplement their libraries with Guided Reading, Language Power guided reading, and Rigby guided reading materials. Additionally, teachers use a variety of web-based subscriptions to target specific skills such as Skills Tutor and the Language Power program We use the Journey's embedded phonics awareness and vocabulary structures for reading and writing for K-5 and is differentiated based on student need. In order to address our special needs population, bilingual paraprofessionals, speech, and related service providers are placed as per IEP. Our bilingual teachers follow the state mandates on delivery of language based on the students' NYSESLAT levels, also ensuring that students receive support in their native language. Newcomer students are also given invitations to Title III programs when appropriate. Further, if schedules allowed, ENL out of classroom staff create Newcomer intervention groups to support students in their development within ELA and Math. In order to meet the needs of our Newcomer ELLs, we have purchased a variety of resources including: ENGLISH NOW!, Language Power reading, and On Our Way To English. Our teachers have been provided training from Language Power reading staff developers. Resources are carefully selected to meet the needs of each student. The Literacy Coach collaborates with teachers and service providers to ensure Newcomer students are engaged in rigorous activities throughout the day. The Wilson program is also used with SIFE Newcomers, as well as ELL-SWDs if appropriate. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? After data inquiry and review, we would like to see more consistent movement and progression of our ELLs in all modalities, listening, speaking, reading, and writing. We have incorporated a co teaching model for ENL instruction to support our ELLs of all levels. This year we have had many new partnerships including a classroom teacher and an ENL out of classroom teacher. For next year, we will provide PD on improving co teaching relationships and instruction between teachers when there are 3 or more teachers in a classroom. This year ENL teachers collaborated to develop meaningful, targeted professional development sessions which they shared with general education teachers by grade. We will continue this practice, and beginning in September, as there was a very positive response to this PD and teachers feel that this will help to support our struggling students as well as all ELLs. We will track progress using running records and benchmark assessments, as well as NYSESLAT results. Arts and music teachers provide instruction to ELLs that is designed to improve language development of ELLs. they have collaborated to create after school performances and will continue to develop these programs. “Making Books Sing” is a non-profit organization that uses literature and content area studies to bring theatre, song writing, and movement into the classroom. A bilingual teaching artist will collaborate with Spanish Dual Language and TBE classroom teachers to plan a student led performance based on a text from the curriculum. Four lower grade classes will participate in a 8 week session that includes tickets to a performance provided by the company, and artists run sessions in which students will study and adapt one text. Teachers will choose a content area text on a social issue. The goal is to explore a variety of reading skills including story elements, character, and word choice, in a way that allows for oral language development and whole class participation. Additional after school planning session for teachers will be provided. The planning sessions will be held with the 4 teachers and 1 coach facilitator. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Our school no longer has Teacher's College literacy program. Our Ell students needed the structure of phonics, vocabulary and scaffolds for our Ell students. Our new literacy program to has a structure to support bilingual students with the scaffolds for the language acquisition levels. In addition, there is support for Ell's through the extra component built in the program. For example there are recommendations for how to teach the level of students, as you address their language level. n/a 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our Ell's have access to our new school literacy program "Journey's- in English and Spanish- Senderos". The program has a built in of Ell support with the different levels of language. The structured vocabulary and phonics supports provide the language development needed for our ELL's. 3  After-school and SAT academy supports instruction for Ell's through our IREADY program. The program has the students teaching at the level of where the students are. Teachers are able to formulate groups, teach one on one, and address the needs of students. After-school and Saturday academy supports instruction for ELLs through our iREADY program. The program has the students working on skills that are specific to their learning needs. Teachers are able to formulate groups, teach one on one, and address the needs of students. Throughout the school year various programs are offered both after school and before the regular school day that specifically address areas including: Test preparation Math intervention Reading Intervention Newcomer needs Language through music 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. P.S. 001 recognizes the importance of visual support and shared materials in ELL education. Our school has made a commitment to using technology to support our ELL subgroups. With our investment in new SMARTboards, all of our ENL Bilingual and Language Enrichment classrooms are equipped with a SMARTboard in their room. ELMO machines are available for teacher use in addition to digital cameras, video cameras, and voice recorders. Teachers also have access to listening centers and computers for students use, that have been equipped with a variety of math and literacy software. In order to maintain and assist teachers in using this new technology, we have technology consultants and Aussie consultants in the building. The literacy program, Journeys, has an embedded technology component. It provides online resources to reinforce vocabulary, small group reading groups, and videos as well as Smartboard activities. In addition, P.S. 001K has invested in interactive computer-based programs. Our school has purchased Imagine Learning accounts to be used with Newcomers. This program guides newcomers via interactive programming, supporting their language development. Via Imagine Learning, teachers also have access to student data reports so that they can monitor and track their students' progress. P.S. 001K has also invested in other programs, such as Language Power and iREADY, which provide students with guided reading books, differentiated lesson suggestions and materials (workbooks, supportive vocabulary cards, etc.). Teachers use iPads to provide visual support for small group instruction. Many classes have iPads for student use in the classroom, where activities reinforce whole group lessons. ENL students are provided with grade appropriate leveled text that is aligned with the common core standards for the grade. Students are provided with instructional supports to give them access to grade level curriculum in all subject areas eg.(hands-on manipulatives, photo cards, sentence prompts, bilingual glossaries/dictionaries and magazines.) The educational websites are used to reinforce skills and strategies for literacy instruction: Flo-cabulary Raz-kids Starfall Quizlett 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is essential for our ELLs, and P.S. 001K we have several resources to help ensure that students receive support in their native language. 4  Within our TBE program, all of our teachers are bilingually certified and deliver instruction for part of the day in students' native language (Spanish). For Entering and Emerging students, this means using the 60:40 model (60% native language, 40% target language); for Transitioning students, a 50:50 model is used; for Expanding students, a 25:75 model is used. To attain these percentages, certain subjects are taught in the native language for all students, but the language for activities and small groups are differentiated based on student needs. Our TBE classes have received many resources to support them in native language instruction, including bilingual teacher guides for all curriculum components as well as student resources in Spanish (i.e. books, workbooks, charts, etc.) Home language reading is assessed using DRAs. Students in grades 3-5 take the ELE and the results are used by the bilingual teachers to inform instruction including small group work. Within our Dual Language Program, a 50/50 model is employed. Students receive half of their instruction in their native language (whether it be English or Spanish) and half in the target language. In Kindergarten, this means students receive most core subjects in their native language, and begin mastering the target language during word study and content area blocks (as well as certain pre-determined core subject blocks). The native language instruction for ELLs is delivered by bilingual certified instructors. Our Dual Language classes have received many resources to support them in native language instruction, including bilingual teacher guides for all curriculum components as well as student resources in Spanish (i.e. books, workbooks, charts, etc.) Further, similar to the TBE program, the Dual Language program is supported by 3 bilingually certified cluster teachers who work with the Dual Language class in content area programming. These instructors also divide their instruction between English and Spanish so as to offer support to students in their native language. As per the mandates of CR-154, instruction in ENL programs is delivered in English. However, students have access to various resources in their native language. Students in our ENL classes have access to books in classroom libraries and the school library in their native language. ENL classrooms also provide students with children dictionaries in their native language. Teachers also make use of technology to support students in their native language; for example, Imagine Learning has native language components to support students. Occasionally, teachers make use of translation services to help translate certain activities into the student's' native language as a scaffold 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ELLs are placed in grade level classes based on age. Regardless of grade, students receive the required services based on the state mandates. This translates to receiving mandated hours of instruction from either ENL or bilingual certified instructors (a minimum of 360 hours a week for Entering/ Emerging students and 180 hours a week for Transitioning/ Expanding students, and 90 minutes for Commanding students). By receiving hours of instruction with a certified teacher, students benefit from smaller group sizes and targeted instructional strategies that are implemented based on the instructor’s knowledge and experience working with ELLs. This instruction is based on grade level expertise- classroom teachers work with a given grade throughout the year, and out of classroom staff are also assigned specific grades so that they can more deeply consider and understand the grade’s curriculum and requirements. Resources are also targeted to specific grade levels. The Language Power and IREADY reading program provides leveled materials and readers. Additionally, all classes are supplied with books that are appropriate for grade-level readers (as well as lower and higher levels for students above/below grade level). All curricular resources are created at grade level and aligned to the Common Core Learning standards to ensure students are reaching grade-level standards. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? PS1 does not share a building with another school, however, we are located in 3 different buildings. We hold collaborative PDs and department and team meetings which include teachers from the 3 buildings. At P.S. 1 there are two designated staff members that oversee the ENL/Bilingual program. We have an Assistant Principal and ELL Coordinator who share resources provided by the Borough Field Support staff with the ENL and Bilingual teachers. In addition, we have a ENL certified literacy coach that provides professional development to the general education teachers in order to support our ENL students throughout the school day. 5  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The parents of all newly enrolled students are invited to an orientation where they screen the Program Orientation video and discuss programming options with a member of the ENL staff (including students who enroll prior to September and students who enroll throughout the year). Our school’s Parent Coordinator also serves as a point of contact for all parents, and reaches out to newly enrolled families to answer questions and provide orientations to the school. All families who pre-register in the Spring are invited to an additional Parent Orientation where they are given packets of information about the school, as well as information about the curriculum. The packet includes homework packets for students to work on prior to starting Kindergarten in the fall. During the first week of school, Kindergarten parents are also invited to the school for a Curriculum Day, where they meet with students’ teachers and are given information about procedures, homework, and the curriculum that will be used during the year. All of this knowledge helps parents support their students’ transition into the school. For Newcomer students who enroll throughout the year, welcome packets are available (including dictionaries, vocabulary journals, leveled books and explanatory letters to parents with suggestions on how to use the materials). Students can take these resources home and use them to support their transition into the P.S. 1 community. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? P.S. 1 does not currently have any language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Students in the Dual Language program receive 50% of instruction in English and 50% of instruction in Spanish. Each Dual Language class is taught by one teacher who has a bilingual certification. Students are heterogeneously grouped according to language proficiency. We use the roller coaster model of instruction. The model used provides instruction in home language in the morning and the target language in the afternoon. This switches each day. Thus, content is delivered in both languages. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The focus of the staff development will be to provide feedback, support and technical assistance to teachers in developing their knowledge of first and second language acquisition theories and practices. They will also be trained in identifying the individual needs of ELLs and scaffolding instruction for these students. We will provide ongoing professional development through a Journey's consultant, Division of English Language Learners and Student Support, Brooklyn North Field Support Center, and school professional development. Professional Learning at PS 1 Journey's staff developers, and staff coaches, one of which is an ELL specialist, will facilitate ongoing study groups within our building. These groups have been arranged as three, 90 minutes sessions to support teachers in developing deeper thinking and conversation around complex texts while considering the needs of ELLs. In grades K-5, teachers with high numbers of ELL students will partake in a study group cycle that provides opportunities for our teachers see best practices in action, reflect on their instructional practices, learn new methodology, and incorporate newly learned researched techniques as they relate to 6  the needs of our English Language Learners. Teachers who are not included in the study groups are given access to the notes and materials from the sessions. Additionally, they are encouraged to collaborate during their common planning periods to obtain more information. Literacy coaches participate in these study groups and are available upon request to support all staff members in integrating new methodologies. Division of English Language Learners and Student Support (DELLSS) In order to take advantage of every opportunity to support teachers who are working with our ELL population, teachers are invited to attend a variety of workshops provided by DELLSS they feel will support their students. These topics related to meeting the needs of ELL students while working towards meeting the demands of the Common Core Learning StandardsProfessional Learning Ongoing professional development tailored to the needs of our students and teachers will be provided within the ENL and TBE meetings. An additional monthly common prep period for Bilingual and ESL teachers is being used for meetings and to discuss the specific needs of their populations as they work to meet the demands of the CCSS. They will also use this time to look across grade levels to better assess student language needs and reflect on trends so that they can plan in a more meaningful way. This vertical meeting also enables the team to pool resources, create materials that can be used as scaffolds across the grade levels based on students’ level of language acquisition.Teachers of ELL students will also be part of lab-sites and collegial walks. This professional development opportunity enables best practices to be demonstrated for some of our new teachers or teachers newly assigned to ELLs, so they can both view quality ELL instruction as well as develop a relationship with a colleague who is a skilled in the area. The Literacy Coaches will provide support in instructional practices to ESL, Bilingual, General and Special Education teachers in cycles. Support will be provided based on teacher need on a variety of topics including: setting language goals, structures and routines, planning small groups, inserting language structures within the components of balanced literacy, helping ELLs transition from one grade level to the next, and increasing rigor and vocabulary development with newcomers and SIFE students. In addition, a variety of voluntary workshops will be provided to support all staff members in learning techniques for serving our ELL population. Professional Learning:*Teachers engaging in unpacking standards *Study group of ELL's*Journey's Professional learning for small group instruction*Identifying student language level and formulating groups *Inquiry study of ELL student- looking at student work and preparing and planning for language levels The Brooklyn North Field Support Center has provided the school with various professional development activities through out the school year. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. * Our professional development agenda's indicate that there is always a conversation regarding our Ell students *September: PD to discuss beginning of year ENL protocol (HLIS, NYSITELL, Spanish Lab) Literacy discussions during PLC Mondays focuses on our ELL's and what are the supports provided*The ELL Coordinator is part of the PD Committee, which plans upcoming PD according to the needs of our staff. September: New Teacher Orientation for ENL teachers October: ENL Coteaching Models in the classroom November: ENL Coteaching Models in the classroom December: SIFE PD for the ENL team February: Writing is Thinking, for ENL students, a four session series. March: Writing is Thinking, for ENL students, a four session series, ENL scaffolds in the classroom, ENL PD on administering the NYSESLAT April: Administering and Scoring the NYSESLAT, Speaking and Writing, ENL scaffolds in the classroom * Records kept in binders reflecting attendance and agendas from all PDs 7  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ESL teachers will schedule parent meetings during Tuesday parent engagement time. We provide translation for families. Our school uses staff members to provide services. We translate documents into other languages by using teachers in the building or submit translation requests to the T&I unit to ensure that translations are distributed at the same time as English documents. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The following is a list of workshops hosted by the ENL team for parents throughout the year. October Parent Workshop on ENL services March Parent Workshop on NYSESLAT information June Parent Workshop on preventing the summer slide for ENL students Our parent coordinators collaborate with coaches and teachers to create hands-on parent workshops that are aimed to bring parents closer to the work in the classroom and provide tools to support their students at home. This year workshops include: Reading Readiness for K -1 Comprehension strategies with a focus on nonfiction reading Grade 2 Preparing Students for the NYS ELA grades 3-5 Developing Counting Skills for K, Developing Fluency with Addition and Subtraction Facts for Grades 1-2 Developing Fluency with Multiplication and Division Facts for Grades 3-5 Preparing Students for the NYS Math Test Grades 3-5 Parent link and Understanding Student Progress Reports Teachers use class DoJo to maintain ongoing communication with parents to discuss student progress Title III funding supports an ENL parent class taught by ENL/ DL, Bilingual teachers. Workshops conducted by Dual Language and Bilingual teachers: Monthly workshops on Tuesdays during parent engagement time Parent Teacher Conference meeting with parents, for example during the two additional days for Parent teacher conference ENL staff provides workshops for parents on “How to continue supporting language” In addition we welcome parents to attend: Tuesday engagement where parent workshops are provided throughout the year, utilizing the Tuesday engagement time. On Wednesday, our PC has weekly meeting with a variety of topics. She includes are ELL parents throughout the variety of workshop. Parent orientation brings out a large amount of parents. Our first meeting for parents brought out more than 100 parents. We have translation available for our parents, the PC, the administrative team, are able to support translation throughout the meetings. We have Fabulous Friday that supports parents visiting classes to observe instruction once a month. Saturday Academy cycle -provides a program for struggling students Parents are invited to our 21 st Century library to access the library resources. Parents are able to take books out for children, and resources are provided via the library. 8  Parent coordinator provides a monthly calendar for parents that has monthly activities with parents and families. Monthly PTA meetings provide information for parents LAP Parental Involvement in regards to Guidance Counselors: *Bullying Workshops presented in english and spanish *Child Abuse Workshop presented in english and spanish *Currently the guidance counselors are facilitating a Leader In Me Parent Book club in spanish. This bookclub reflects upon the book The 7 Habits of Happy Kids by Sean Covey. The parents were given a copy of the book in spanish and stories are read and discussed in spanish. The same book club is also offered to parents in english. *Guidance Counselors meet with parents on a regular basis to discuss student’s progression andor struggles. Parent meetings are facilitated in either english or spanish and the Language Line is used if any other language is necessary. *All teachers are given the information to use the Language Line when they cannot communicate with a parent due to a difference in language. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Not applicable. 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Arlene Ramos, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Bergen School School DBN: K001 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Arlene Ramos Title Principal Wanda Ramirez Assistant Principal Maribel Pina Parent Coordinator Marisol Sheenan ENL/Bilingual Teacher n/a Parent Jacqueline Rosenberg Teacher/Subject Area Carrie Koensberg Teacher/Subject Area Mary Tomac n/a Megan Pratt Anita Skop M. Ortiz Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 n/a 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 n/a 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: k001 School Name: Bergen School Superintendent: Anita Skop The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Maribel Marisol Wanda Pina Parent Coordinator No Sheenan Ramirez LAC Assistant Principal Yes No Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parents are able to fill out the HLIS in the following languages: English, Spanish, Chinese, and Arabic. The forms have been updated and they are on-line off of the DOE website. In addition, our report cards are able to be printed and in the parents native language. Our emergency blue cards have been ordered in the languages that our school population represents. We use the language ID guide, and direct parents as needed. The guide is in the office, by the security desk, and on the Bulletin Board as parents walk through the door. 2  Our school community identifies native language learners. We have more than half of our school staff members who speak the predominately identified language -Spanish that articulate with our school community. We use parent preferred written and oral language indicated by parents on the HLIS, We use the RCLP report to gather parent preferred language, and parent preferred languages form filled out at registration. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Araucanian Arabic Aymara Burmese Cham Chinese Cantonese Mandarin English Spanish Setswana Urdu 0 20 0 1 0 129 0 0 417 1104 0 2 0 1.2 0 .06 0 7.71 0 0 24.93 65.99 0 .12 1 1 1 1 1 100 1 25 412 1109 1 3 .06 1.08 .06 .06 .06 5.98 .06 1.49 24.63 66.29 .06 ,18 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. not applicable Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Newsletters Monthly Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Teachers submit their request to the Translation Committee, and within 3 two weeks before the translation is due the committee is able to provide the document. In addition, we have an Asian educational assistant that supports our Asian population throughout the day. In addition she is utilized for translating documents. The translation for documents are available as we have them on a drive to share with staff and parents as needed. Calendars Monthly The school messenger Daily messages Friday Reminders Entitlement letters for programs or resources from the department of education The letters for after-school in the parents native language. During the testing month, we provide translators to inform parents of the expectation of the exams and how to support children Letters to parents are monthly After school letters is in October and every 6 weeks as a new cycle for after school. Testing, month April/May Student Report Cards are two times a year November and March. . The letter for the school leadership PTA President speaks in her native language Spanish to parent association. Monthly Parent Meetings/Translations are available Student progress reports translated Oct. Dec. Jan. Feb. April, and May n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 4  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Curriculum night there were translators. Spanish support was provided. y Educational Assistants. We have continued our partnership with Teacher's College ESL/TESOL program and student teachers that support their cooperating teacher A student teacher was able to support of handful of teachers native language Chinese- . As a school our parent coordinator, plans and prepares for Parent Teacher Conferences to ensure the translation company to supports our school community Teachers meet during Parent Engagement Tuesday, and are planned and prepared as the ensure translation is available Our school has a monthly practice: Fabulous Friday, the parents are Curriculum night is Sept. Our staff members are able to support colleagues to translate in Spanish. Our school supports our staff members as Spanish is the dominant language and the colleagues support peers during the parent teacher conferences, curriculum night and major events within the school. Orientation for parents, in the beginning of the year, and at the end of the year for the incoming Pre-K students. We as a school have the staff who are able to provide interpretation and translation. We are supported by the Translation Committee and staff is assigned to specific area within school as they are summoned to the meetings. Sept/Nov. and March Parent Coordinator schedules the translators for the grades and for staff that requests for the translation. Our school is familiar with the protocols of contacting the interpretation unit as needed. The guidelines for talking to the unit as needed. Our school utilizes the "Big Word" as a resource during the Parent Teacher Conferences. 5  invited to come to their children's class and the parents participate with an activity in the classroom. All the activities include a hands on activity, which promotes ENL strategies for parents. In addition, parents are able to engage with their children, and participate on active learning. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. As a school, we are pro-active within our translation, as staff members support their colleagues. In addition our parent coordinator is resourceful in having the school messenger that contacts parents, and can interpret to families as needed. We use the translation interpretation unit for over the phone interpretation for in person meetings with parents we well as phone calls with parents. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the beginning of the year our school, the principal addresses the Chancellor's Policy for interpretation. We ensure that our new staff members, are familiar with the resources, provided to them. Interpretation services, are transparent as a school. This is discussed with new staff members during our new teacher meetings. In addition, we have a new teacher breakfast, where we focus on survival skills for new teachers, ensuring that they are familiar with making connections with parents. During our initial meeting for curriculum night, our parent coordinator surveys the school building. The Parent Coordinator , assigns staff members, as needed to support in interpretation services. In addition, our parent coordinator has a bulletin board that has the numbers and resources, transparent for our school community. Our school has staff members, that support colleagues in the interpretation support. When there is a need for translation and or interpretation services, there is an outreach for support. There is a translation number, that we reach out to on a regular basis as needed. In addition, the office staff has established a protocol, an office staff member contacts the translation unit (as needed). We will have a translation and interpretation meeting to discuss with all staff in the beginning of the year. The Language Access Coordinator has created a flyer and shared it with the entire staff with protocols and numbers for easy access to the Translation and Interpretation Unit. It is redistributed regularly and it was discussed at a school wide meeting on October 24, 2017. 6  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school continues to be proactive in using the resources within our school. For example the PTA president is bilingual, Spanish. Our school community continues to have staff members that support meetings and school activities as they support during interpreting for parents. As a school we have an official Translation Committee that support staff in translating what is needed to communicate with parents, and translation of tasks for our children in the bilingual or dual language classes. In addition there are the parents letters, newsletters, calendars, reminders of holidays, school activities etc. In addition, we have a school messenger, that translates the messages, in the different languages that are identified in our school. All of our letters for parents go out in all of the identified languages. Our school has purchased ear phones, to support the interpretation services. When parents are attending meetings their is the option of using the earphones as they listen to the translator. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will have a discussion with the PTA president, and the parent coordinator to put out a survey that will provide feedback from parents. The focus would be to fill out when they attend a school activity, fabulous Friday, or the weekly professional learning for parents scheduled in the school every Wednesday. The focus would be "Do You feel supported during meetings" In addition, we will have an exit slip for parents as they leave from meeting with teachers that will ask, how did we do today? Did we support you with translation/interpretation today? Our principal continues to be pro-active as she attends the meetings and supports with translation and interpretation. We will provide a survey for parents in order for them to update their preferred language of communication, and feedback regarding current methods used, and their needs. 7 
