 School Name: 17K006 P.S. 006 Principal: SHARON PORTER   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Norma Adams Clemons Academy 17K006 School Number (DBN): 331700010006 K-5 43 Snyder Avenue, Brooklyn NY 11226 718-856-6560 Phone Number: 718-856-7493 Fax: Sharon Porter sporter22@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Sharon Porter AileenEdwards Jasmin Brown Email Address: Parents’ Association President: Dawn Ismael-Jackson SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Samantha Lloyd NA NA Rita Joseph District Information Geographical District: 17 Mr. Clarence Ellis Superintendent: 1224 Park Place Brooklyn NY 11213 Superintendent’s Office Address: CEllis3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-221-4372 Phone Number: 718-221-4326 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn Field Support Center FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: MauriciereDegovia Executive Director: 415, 89 th Street Brooklyn, New York MDegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 1 (718) 759-4862 Phone Number: NA 1(718) 759-4960 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Sharon Porter Aileen Edwards Jasmin Brown Melinda Dunlop Samantha Lloyd NA NA Rita Joseph Margaret Wickham Linda Jordan-Kennedy *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Parent Parent   Jennifer Byrd Sasha Peters Caprice Barclift Betty Dorant Dawn Ismael-Jackson EEmarEEmarraEEmaMMaMMarMMaMMarcMMaMMarMMaMMarcelarraEEmaMMaMMarMMaMMarcMMaMMarMMacelarraEEmaMMaMMarMMMaMMarMMacelarraEEmaMEmaMMaMM Emarra Marcelus Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Parent Parent Paraprofessional Teacher Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our Mission Statement Section 4: CEP Overview P.S. 6 is a multi-cultural community dedicated to educating the whole child. We nurture the creativity, talents, and abilities of all children to achieve academic success in a rigorous standards based environment. Through a collaborative effort and clear expectations based in on-going assessments our students become free thinking members of the community.   Our Vision Statement The vision of P.S. 6 is to support the Whole Child: •Socially and Emotionally •Collaboratively •Culturally Responsive Education •Inclusively •Safe Environment •Academically 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Public School 6 is a learning community where children and adults alike are encouraged to develop and share positive learning experiences. We are located at 43 Snyder Avenue in a well kept modern building located in East Flatbush section of Brooklyn, New York. We boarder a densely populated inner-city commercial district along Flatbush and Church Avenues, adjacent to the majestic and historic Erasmus Hall High School. This Kindergarten to Fifth Grade Elementary School, provides a highly structured and supportive educational environment to a diverse population of approximately 750 students. The students we serve come from ethnically and culturally diverse backgrounds. The community is home to a growing number of Caribbean, Hispanic, Arabic and Asian immigrants and the school is an integral part of the community. In addition, our student population is academically diverse as we serve English Language Learner, gifted students, students with disability, and students without disability. We believe that students are individuals and create an environment that will meet and develop their academic, emotional, and social needs. It is important that we educate the whole child in our multicultural school environment that provides a safe and nurturing atmosphere for student to learn and develop into globally competitive citizens. Programs Public School 6 offers a wide range of programs within the school curriculum, after-school, and during non-instructional days to students, parents, and the community:  Breakfast in the Classroom: Students are provided with a nutritious and healthy breakfast daily.  Cookshop: Students participate in interactive hands-on lessons that provide them with the knowledge and skills needed to adapt and enjoy a nutritious diet and active lifestyle on a limited budget. Students learn where food come from and they get the opportunity to taste food that are necessary for a healthy diet.  Cookshop Families: Parents and guardians are invited to participate in a complementary program to the cookshop classroom. Participants engage in workshops focusing on such topics as reading food labels, meal planning, storage tips, portion sizes, being active as part of a healthy lifestyle and healthy recipe demonstration.  Visual Art: Students in grades k-5 participate in weekly visual arts classes where they explore art materials, techniques, and learn art history. Our program is aligned to the NYC Blueprint for Art Education. Families are invited to participate in our annual Family Art Night and create artwork along with their children.  Theater: Students participate in our theater art program which provides rich and creative instruction in theater making ( acting, play writing/play making, design and technical theater, and directing theater making). Students also develop their theater literacy which provides them with the skills and knowledge to deepen their understanding of many forms and genre of theater as well as explore theater history. Students also get the opportunity throughout the school year to participate in original theater productions.  Music: Students will be exposed to and learn how to play musical instruments such as string, wind, and percussion.  Dance: We collaborate with partners from the NYC arts and cultural community such as the Cynthia King Dance Studio to engage students in rich and diverse dance instructions. Students learn various forms of dance 0  from traditional to emerging styles. This includes Ballet, African, Afro-Caribbean, Modern, Bollywood, Jazz, Hip-Hop, and Contemporary Dance.  Kinder-Academy: Incoming Kindergarten students spend six weeks during the Summer learning foundational skills necessary for their learning academy that provide for small group intense academic interventions and support. These academies occur during after-school, Saturdays, Winter Recess, and Spring Recess.  Pets in the Classroom: Through participation in this program our students are provided with an opportunity to interact with small pets allowing an experience that can help shape their lives for years to come. Students are taught how to bond with, care for and study different animals.  Technology Lab: Students have access to a wide range of technology which brings 21st century learning to the classroom. Each classroom is equipped with a Promethean interactive board, student desktop computers, and a printer. Classrooms have access to grade-wide laptop cart attached to a printer to meet students' research needs.  Chess: Students in 3rd - 5th grades receive Chess instruction in the classroom as part of the school curriculum.  Sports: Students are able to participate in various after-school sport teams and clubs. These teams and clubs provide students with the opportunity to increase physical activity, self-esteem, mental awareness, and collaboration. o Basketball Team o Volleyball Team o Soccer Team o Tennis Team o African Dance Team o Crochet/Knitting/Needle Point Club o Arts Club o Chess Club o Theater Club o Chorus Club  Languages: French and Spanish are taught in order to enhance students' career and college readiness skills. Student Expectation At Public School 6, we foster high expectations for all students. The education of the whole child is paramount, supported by good and improving attendance, clear school procedures, effective use of data and a thoroughly engaging curriculum. Our commitment is to finding and enhancing the gifts, talents and academic skills of each student. To this end we expand our students’ experiences and foster an education of the whole child through partnerships with our staff, parents and the community. We cultivate partnerships with the Science Environmental Center, Brooklyn Navy Yard, Brooklyn College, Medgar Evers College and Brooklyn Children’s Museum.  Our curricula is align to the Common Core State Standards. They provide the rigor students need to actively engage in ambitious intellectual activities and develop critical thinking skills. In order to support the curricula, several pedagogues have been trained in literacy specific RTI strategies that will aid in closing the achievement gap. Student writing is celebrated through a K – 5 Writer’s Wall as well as displays through hallways and classrooms. In grades K – 2, we place an emphasis on Academic Intervention Services with interventions such as the iReady, Wilson Fundations, SPIRE, ReadyGen Phonics, EasyCBM to progress monitor language acquisition, and promote readers by the end of 2nd grade.    Through the TAC-D program, students are expected to enhance and improve their social and emotional   awareness. Students use technology to enhance their learning. Students are expected to utilize the online resources such as: Skoolbo, SucessMaker, Reading Plus, ReadyGen, GoMath, Code Monkey, Discovery Education, Social Studies Passport, iReady and EasyCBM that may be utilized at school and at home. These programs track students’ progress in ELA and Math. 1  Teacher Expectations  Plan for rigorous instructions with the following in mind: Common Core State Standards, Universal Design for Learning, and Danielson’s Framework.  Participate in weekly Vertical and Horizontal Teacher Teams meetings.  Participate in monthly Inquiry Team meetings where they will analyze students' work and assessments, review teaching practices, and plan for future lessons and make changes to facilitate students growth.  Participate in Professional Learning Communities in the school, district, and citywide to adjust and enhance their professional growth.  Participate in webinars and book clubs, to support the Professional Learning Communities.  Be available to meet parents Tuesday afternoons to foster the home-school connection. Community Involvement  We have a partnership with the Adult Night Education program that aims to teach some of our parents English to get them on the road to College and Career readiness.  We annually hold a street fair, Town Hall Meeting, Legislative and Community Breakfast, Muffins with Moms, Donuts with Dads, Grand-Parents’ Day, Dads Take Your Child to School Day, Toy Drive, etc.  We foster an association with the Boys and Girls Club of America.  We collaborate with NYC Parks and Recreation in enhancing life skills in swimming and tennis.  We are affiliated with State Senator Kevin Parker, Councilman Matthieu Eugene, Borough President Eric Adams, and Assembly Woman Rodneyse Bichotte for the enhancement of school resources.  We facilitate Career Day, where we host a vast number of community professionals who share and advise students on their path to become College and Career Ready. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. English Language Learners: 21% of the school population is comprised of English Language Learners. They are made up of Arabic, Spanish, Haitian Creole, French, and Chinese speaking students. The needs vary from meeting grade level standards to acquiring English proficiency. Students with Disabilities: 20% of the school populations is comprised of Students with Disabilities. In pass two years, we've seen an increase in Autism and Emotional Disorder classifications. The needs are in pedagogues receiving further training in best practices to advance these students in the curriculum and social needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. According to the Framework for Great Schools Report 2017, there were three areas where we made the most progress: Rigorous Instructions 2  Collaborative Teachers Effective School Leadership 2018-2019 Focus: Rigorous Instruction Our Instructional focus for the 2018-2019 school year is for students to read and comprehend text on grade level. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 17K006 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 667 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 87 87 31 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 36 35 32 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 84.0% % Attendance Rate 83.2% % Reduced Lunch 22.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.6% 22.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 19.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 81% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A YSH NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 70 71 25 91.7% 0.4% 19.8% 71.8% 1.0% 1.8% 4 0% 6.4 22.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the June, 2018 Instructional Report our students showed the following: Strengths in Mathematics   In Mathematics, our students in grades 3 – 5, showed their strengths in Decomposing Fractions and Interpreting Multiplication. In Mathematics, our students in grades K – 2, showed strengths Operations and Algebraic Thinking. Priority needs in Mathematics   In Grades 3 – 5, students needs were in Understanding Fractions and Multiplication Word Problems. In Grades K – 2, students had difficulty in Numbers, Operations in Base ten. Strengths in English Language Arts   In Grades 3 – 5, students showed growth in Writing and Word Meaning in context. In Grades K – 2, students showed growth in Reading Comprehension. Priority needs in English Language Arts   In grades K - 5, students were weak in analyzing events in order to identify Point of View and Determining the Themes. In grades K - 2, students were weak in Language Acquisition. 5  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the Math Teacher Team will collaboratively work on assessments to (1) drive instruction and (2) increase student performance as measured by 20% increase in the Chapter Assessments. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School Base Inquiry Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students in grades K - 5 Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal  Teachers will use the Medical Model of Inquiry to identify students that are in “Wellness, Out Patient, Inpatient, and Life Support – (Tier Instruction) Identify research base strategies that will correct weaknesses.   Engage in a 6 weeks cycle where the targeted skill/concept/population is monitored for growth using the researched strategy  Reassess the identified weakness to measure growth or revise the strategy.  Repeat the cycle with a new skill/concept/population or revisit the previous weakness. STH ELL SWDs APs ULIT Coach Writing Coach Data Specialist Pedagogues Educational Assistance Research-Based Instructional Program -ReadyGen supplemented by: Students in K - 5 Sept 2018 All P June 2019 Principal  Pearson Realize  ReadyGen Phonics  Wilson Foundations  EngageNY.org    Discovery Education  Code Monkey   EasyCBM SPIRE Skoolbo iReady -TC Writing Program -GoMath supplemented by: APs ULIT Coach Writing Coach Data Specialist Pedagogues Educational Assistance 7   EngageNY  ThinkCentral N/A N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will develop a more collaborative partnership with families and communities by providing the following on rigorous instruction and the Common Core Learning Standards. Literacy and Math Monthly Workshops   Weekend Parent Institutes  Evening Testing Workshops  Monthly Newsletters    Holding Curriculum Nights that focus on Math/Science/Social Studies/ELA School Program Brochure School Website & Twitter We have a partnership with the Adult Night Education program that aims to teach some of our parents English to get them on the road to College and Career readiness. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I, Tax Levy, Title III funds will be used to provide resource to enhance instruction throughout the school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Parent surveys, attendance monitoring, conferencing. 8   K – 5 teachers will progress monitor through GoMath, Mobymax, Kiddom, ReadyGen, iReady, Baseline, Benchmark in ELA and Math. Special Education, ENL L and AIS teachers will progress monitor using EasyCBM and Wilson Language Works.    4th grade teachers will progress monitor science through Harcourt, FOSS, and Pearson’s Beginning of Year and End of Year, in addition to the State Science Test.  Teacher Observations Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) GoMath ReadyGen =End of Unit Assessments iReady Baseline/Benchmark for ELA and Math EasyCBM Wilson/Foundation Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? As per the Framework for Great Schools Report of 2017 safety in the school is rated as 100%. However, classroom behavior is rated as 95%. As a school, we need to make teachers knowledgeable of systems and safety protocols that are in place. We need to conduct monthly workshops on de-escalation, and TAC-D strategies. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will develop and implement regular workshops with the 70th Precinct's Youth Officer, implement school wide use of the PBIS Program and CRE strategies to support a culturally responsive environment that is safe and conducive to learning for all children as measured by a 5% decrease in OORS Reports, Principal's suspensions, Superintendent suspension, and an increase in positive parent feedback. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Research-based Systems and Structures K - 5 students Sept 2018-June 2019 All staff members  PBIS  TAC-D  De-escalation Plan Professional Development  PBIS Workshop  TAC-D Workshop  De-escalation Plan   Paraprofessional Workshops Special Education Institute Systems and Structures   Safe-Haven on each floor Intervention Suit – CCC, Guidance and Parent Coordinator  Workshops for students and parents on the Discipline Code SIT meetings   Monthly RTI meetings K - 5 students Sept 2018-June 2019 All staff members K - 5 students Sept 2018 June 2019 All staff members Strategies for SWD and English Language Learners Sept 2018-June 2019 All staff members  Use of purposeful communicative activities, such as discussion protocols to engage in questioning and discussion  Purposefully design assessments and tasks that are challenging and relevant  Purposefully use materials that have visual cues to give students access to meaning K - 5 students N/A 1  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will receive monthly workshops on the Disciplinary Code, De-Escalation, and TAC-D. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Students will participate in after school programs. We will adjust scheduling to provide PDs in the areas of UDL, RTI, and Best Practices. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. To monitor the goal above, we will conduct:  Parent surveys, Attendance monitoring at workshops and parent conferences. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. To access progress in promoting a school that encourages a supportive environment, we will review the Accountability Report for 2017 - 2018 school year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the Framework for Great School Report 2017, our school commitment is unwavering at 98%. However, innovation was rated at 82%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the Inquiry Team will collaboratively review students work in Reading/Writing and Math to identify the weaknesses and determine the skills that are necessary to improve instructional support and student outcomes as measured by 20% increase in students Reading and Writing on grade level. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Research-Based Professional Development K - 5 students Sept 2018-June 2019 Math Team  Teachers will use the Medical Model of Inquiry to identify students that are in “Wellness, Out Patient, Inpatient, and Life Support – (Tier Instruction) Identify research base strategies that will correct weaknesses.   Engage in a 6 weeks cycle where the targeted skill/concept/population is monitored for growth using the researched strategy  Reassess the identified weakness to measure growth or revise the strategy.  Repeat the cycle with a new skill/concept/population or revisit the previous weakness. K - 5 students Sept 2018-June 2019 Math Team Systems and Structures  Weekly planning committees  Monthly committees  Built in schedule that facilitates common planning (Horizontal Teacher teams)  Vertical teacher teams Team meeting protocols (Medical Model of Inquiry, Tunning, Artifact Box) Strategies for SWD and English Language Learners  Use of purposeful communicative activities, such as discussion protocols to engage in questioning and discussion  Purposefully design assessments and tasks that are challenging and relevant K - 5 students Sept 2018-June 2019 Math Team 4   Purposefully use materials that have visual cues to give students access to meaning N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School will provide Monthly Parent Workshops to parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff members, district wide and city wide consultants will be use to conduct workshops and institutes for parent to inform them about strategies being used in the classrooms. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The school will use periodical assessments (Baseline, Benchmarks), Ready Gen End of Unit and Benchmark Assessments, Go Math Baseline, End of Chapter and Critical Area Assessments to track progress and set goals. In addition, teachers will utilize daily formative assessments to monitor standards/skill acquisition. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Benchmark Baseline MOSL FP Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per The Framework for Great Schools Report 2017, teachers identify a strong Program Coherence across the grades. However, teachers expressed a need for a more inclusive leadership in terms of Professional Development and Decision Making in reference to their students and the curriculum. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, varied distributive leadership structures will be established with a focus on empowering teacher leadership, as evidenced by the NYC School Survey measure "Teacher Influence" increasing by 5%. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Development In building capacity around the school, many teachers have been attending professional development and becoming specialist in their fields of study. As specialist, they will share their findings and knowledge about the subject area. Gen. Ed Sp.Ed. ESL Funded Clusters Systems and Structures Monthly meeting:  Following staff development, teacher teams meet to formulate their action plan. Subject Area base meetings   RTI meeting SIT meeting  Instructional meeting / Cabinet  meetings with Administrators and Coaches. Content Area Paraprofessionals Gen. Ed Sp.Ed. ESL Funded Clusters Content Area Paraprofessionals Sept 2018-June 2019 Asst Prin, Coach, designated teachers, District Representatives Sept 2018-June 2019 Asst Prin, Coach, designated teachers  Timing feedback  One-on-one meetings with Administrators  Book Club  SLT meeting 7  N/A Promote Parent Engagement and Leadership Parents Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, APs, Coach, designated teachers  Parents participate in School Leadership Team (SLT)  Tuesday Meet the Teacher  Monthly Parent Workshop  Title I Workshop  Title III Workshop  Homework Help  Monthly Newsletter  Letters (publish in several languages)  Monthly school calendar 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Members of the School Leadership Team provides continuous collaboration in developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan. In addition, the PTA president will continue to turn key valuable information to parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Utilize instructional teams to provide Professional Development. Funds will be made available to facilitate teachers’ professional development. Purchase professional books to facilitate best practices that are research based. Make allowances for inter-class and school visitations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress Monitoring is address through Parents / teachers surveys and Formal and Informal conversations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 8  We will collect the surveys regularly. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As stated in the Framework for Great Schools Report 2017 – 2018, teacher outreach to parents reported a 91% positive response. However, parent involvement only reported a 82% positive response. As a school, we need to create more opportunities for parents to volunteer, and enhance our ties with community organizations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, K - 5 teachers will link parents to students' learning through more frequent communications about students' academic progress as measured by 20% parental engagement overall (surveys, workshop attendance, weekly meetings, and progress report tear-offs). 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Systems and Structures Needed to Impact Change Parents Sept 2018-June 2019 PTA, APs, Coach, designated teachers, District Representatives, Parent Coordinator  We will advertise our parent meetings.  Parent coordinator will plan meetings to meet the needs of parents.  Tuesday Meet the Teacher  Monthly Parent Workshop  Title I Workshop  Title III Workshop  Homework Help  Monthly Newsletters  Letters (publish in several languages)  Monthly school calendars  Instant Notification on PS 6 app N/A N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. CAMBA BEACON 1  Boys / Girls Club Medgar Evers College Brooklyn College Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. As a result, this year we will continue to provide more focus parent workshop that caters to their needs, vary the schedule to include evening and weekend workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will monitor the PTA attendance record for the various meetings and encourage parents to complete surveys to better help them. In addition, we will track and maintain logs of formal and informal conversations with parents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use the Framework for Great School Report to assess progress in meeting parents' needs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Assessments, teacher recommendation Assessments, teacher recommendation Assessments, teacher recommendation Assessments, teacher recommendation Evaluations, teacher recommendations Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Ready Gen-Scaffolded strategy, Interactive writing, Wilson Fundations Go Math-Re-teaching pre-requisite standards, and Scaffolding Hartcourt-collaboration with the Environmental Center Interactive writing on informational text, repeated reading Guidance and social Worker Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group and whole class During the school day Small group and whole class Small group and whole class During the school day During the school day Small group and whole class During the school day One-to-One, small group During the school day 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) For school year 2017 - 2018, we have 163 STH. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We have a five-day social worker assigned to Students in Temporary Housing. STH funding is allocated towards the purchase of supplies, school trips, and gym clothes. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Strategies and activities used to attract highly-qualified teachers in our school include;  We partner with Field Support Office of Talent and Recruit, and colleges  Participating in Central Hiring Fair events where pre-screened Highly Qualified Teachers are interviewed and  recruited Interviewing Highly Qualified Teachers from the Open Market Hiring System and the Absent Teacher Reserve (ATR)  Establishing a rigorous interview protocol that includes intensive criteria for the selection of a new staff member including demonstration lessons, interviews and NYS certification 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Individual PD plans are created for teachers to ensure continued improvement  Needs Assessment - PD opportunities are based on specific needs for development.  Maintaining a teacher resource room and professional library to promote promising and effective practices.   Weekly meeting with specific staff members to provide support and PD  Regional sessions for specific staff will focus on areas of instruction  Professional literature for designated staff  ESL and Special Education Specialists from colleges will provide PD for the staff.  Teachers will be provided with curriculum maps, instructional resources and professional learning opportunities. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 6  Targeted Assistance program will allow us to offer academic after school programs to enhance our “Push-able and Slip-able” students’ education. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). To help maximize instruction in the classroom, many of our Tier II and Tier III service providers (AIS and ESL) will follow the push-in method where they collaborate and reiterate what the classroom teachers are teaching. Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Transition activities include: Family tours prior to registration   Kinder Academy in Summer  Parent orientation in June and September  Parent coordinator sponsored “Tea in the Garden” with new families  Open school week  Parent teacher conferences  Distribution of “What to Expect in Kindergarten” materials  IEPs from “Turning Five’ process reviewed immediately following registration 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers individually selected the Danielson observation option of their choice- Option 1 - 4. Teachers and administrators meet on a regular basis to collaborate, discuss and review assessment results. Plans are developed to address and enhance specific areas of instruction. Administrators will supports teachers by frequently visiting, observing and documenting instructional best practices which will be followed up with one – to - one meetings to share instructional recommendations for improvement. 7  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) See Action Plan See Action Plan See Action Plan See Action Plan x x x x Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 586,250.00 109,162.00 14,926.00 0 3,960,987.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 8  semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Public School 6, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Public School 6 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 0  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parent Involvement  We promote proper nutrition through Cookshop for parents once a month.  Parents are provided with up to date information via the school website, www.PS6naca.org, as well as a school app. Homework for all grade levels is updated weekly. Notifications are sent through the app.  Classroom teachers are able to provide up to the minute information on student's behavior via ClassDojo. Parents can receive class notices and text directly with their student's teacher.  Parents participate in decision making process through the School Leadership Team (SLT).  Our parent coordinator facilitates: o Learning Leaders o Phone Messaging system to inform parents of school events o School calendar  Memos in several languages  Parent workshops  Parents participate in the decision making process on the School Leadership Team (SLT).  We offer Curriculum night for families where we provide them with school information, and discuss the Common Core State Assessments.  We maintain a school website (PS6naca.org) as well as a school app (ps6app). Homework is uploaded weekly. Instant notifications are forwarded as soon as necessary, through the ps6app.  We conduct the Middle school information night. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; 1  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2  Public School 6, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 3  ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 4  ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 5  ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete all homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 6  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Begin description here: The data inquiry teams along with the ENL Teachers have analyzed all data concerning ELLs and have determined that ELLs require supplemental services to achieve proficiency to meet the New York State Core Standard in Language Arts and Mathematics. The New York State ELA, Pearson Benchmarks, Fontas & Pinnell Assessment, and ENL Periodic assessments results show that ELLs are weak in the following literacy skills: Grades K to 2 are weak in phonological awareness, phonics and word recognition; third graders are weak in recounting stories and being able to determine the central message and explain how it is conveyed through key ideas in a text; fourth graders are weak in drawing conclusions, making inferences and using context to determine meaning; and fifth graders are weak in comparing and contrasting on one topic from multiple sources such as well as determining the meaning of general academic and domain specific words and phrases. Therefore, the program will focus on developing these comprehension skills through an afterschool program. There will be 10-15 students of ENL groups from grade K to Grade 5. The data inquiry teams along with the ENL Teachers have analyzed all data concerning ELLs and have determined that ELLs require supplemental services to achieve proficiency to meet the New York State Core Standard in Language Arts and Mathematics. The New York State ELA, Pearson Benchmarks, Fontas & Pinnell Assessment, and ENL Periodic assessments results show that ELLs are weak in the following literacy skills: Grades K to 2 are weak in phonological awareness, phonics and word recognition; third graders are weak in recounting stories and being able to determine the central message and explain how it is conveyed through key ideas in a text; fourth graders are weak in drawing conclusions, making inferences and using context to determine meaning; and fifth graders are weak in comparing and contrasting on one topic from multiple sources such as well as determining the meaning of general academic and domain specific words and phrases. Therefore, the Title III Immigrant program will focus on developing these comprehension skills through a Saturday or afterschool program. There will be 10-15 students of ENL groups from grade K to 5. The program model of instruction offered at Public School 006 is 'Freestanding English as a New Language with some home language support, where deemed necessary, emphasizing English acquisition. There are six certified ESL teachers. The literacy component will emphasize vocabulary development, critical thinking and writing skills. Literacy and Mathematics development will be enhanced through the use of Engage New York, published by the New York State Education Department, I-Ready which is a web-based reading intervention program at no cost uses technology to enhance the five pillars of reading for students in grades K through 5 and higher. I-Ready aims to develop and improve students’ silent reading fluency, comprehension, and vocabulary. NYSESLAT results show that there are many long term ELLs and/or ELLs who remain on one language proficiency level for more than one year. Therefore, preparing for the NYSESLAT is another important aspect of the program and to meet the New York State Core Standards in Language Arts. Grade K to 2 data shows that ELLs are weak in counting in coordinately and numbers and operation in base ten. The New York State Mathematics test results show that ELLs are weak in numeration, algebra and problem solving. The mathematics component will focus on improving these skills and learning how to apply new strategies for problem solving and will be taught by a designated ESL teacher. 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information For example using the acronym CUBES (C= Circle key numbers and units; U= Underline the question; B= Box math "action “words; E= evaluate and eliminate; S= Show your work and check) to help students break down a word problem to solve. Program funds will further support instructional practice such as hands-on task, questioning and explicit instruction, through which students will reason abstractly and quantitatively, model with mathematics, construct viable arguments and critique the reasoning of others. Such practices, will allow for students to communicate precisely with others and try using clear mathematical language when discussing their reasoning. The extra time provided would reiterate the need to simplify complex problems and reflect on whether results make sense, possibly improving or revising models Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Begin description here: Professional Development will center on the Reading Pillars (Phonemic Awareness, Phonics, Fluency, Vocabulary, and Comprehension) in addition, will focusing on the Mathematical Shifts, Standards for Mathematical Practice in conjunction with the Mathematical Domains. The rationales for these PDs have two objectives: enhance pedagogues' craft and produce "Commanding/Former" ELLs. The professional learning team will consist of a study group that will focus in the area of academic literacy, as well as mathematics instructions for ELLs. The participating teachers will meet weekly to analyze and discuss English Learners' Academic Literacy and mathematics test results. They will analyze and evaluate data patterns to determine next steps for ENL students grade K to 5. Teachers will meet to specifically curriculum plan before the program begins to make sure that instruction is directly correlated to the current needs of the ENL students. Furthermore, they will set meeting dates throughout the school year to meet and discuss strategies that work and their impact on the ENL population. The purpose of this group will be to identify and put into practice new strategies to best assist ELLs in acquiring skills and academic literacy and get them college and career ready. The teachers in this group will be Ms. Ramos, Ms. Romeiser, Ms. N. Kodianthara, Ms. Compas, Ms. Jacques and Ms. Saleh. During teacher development the topics to be discussed are ELA/Math instructional strategies and the provider is Engage N.Y.com as well as looking at the structure and implementation of the I-Ready. They will turnkey to other teachers whose classes have ELLs and to those who are required to complete seven hours of ESL training. The network, the Department of English Language Learners and Student Support, will also provide workshops. We will keep record of the agenda and attendance sheets of each PD and workshops. In order to meet CR Part 154 mandates for professional development, 15% of the PD plans and calendar for school year 2018 - 2019, will focus on language acquisition and language instruction for English Language Learners. In addition, ENL service providers will form a focus group that will receive PD, also dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, best practices to teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English 9  Part C: Professional Development Language Learners, 50% of the time. The duration of the Afterschool Program will be from October to December two dats a week. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Begin description here: Since parents are the sole determinants of the ELL programs their children will receive, their involvement is crucial to the education and English language acquisition. Parents will be better equipped to help their children at home and be part of their educational process providing the orientation and expectations are made explicitly clear from the outset. At registration, parents will be made aware of the ELL programs offered in New York City and the program/s offered at the 17K006. In addition, parental involvement will consist of three events: The first will be a Math Workshop entitled "Achieving Success in Mathematics", will focus on techniques to help students master some basic math skills that are necessary for advancing in mathematics. The second event will be an "Afternoon Tea" for students and parents where parents will be able to speak and interact with others. The third event will be a Technology Workshop for parents to become aware of the I-Ready Programs and how it can help them and their children acquire the language. Each of the groups will present a culminating activity to the parents to celebrate students' accomplishments. The Technology Workshop will take place in December 2018, led by the Technology Teacher and the ESL teacher. The Mathematics Workshop will take place in January 2019, led by the ESL teachers. The "Afternoon Tea" will take place in April 2019 to showcase the children's accomplishments. All students and teachers will participate. All parents of ELLs will be invited to all events. Letters and fliers in English, Spanish, French, Haitian Creole and Arabic will be sent via the students. Follow up phone calls will be made. We will keep records of agendas, attendance sheets and invitations. Also our Parent Coordinator; Mr. S. Narvaez is a strong liaison to our ELL parents and will collaborate in all events held. In addition, translation services will be available. All records and agendas will be kept in a binder in the ENL Coordinator room. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $0.00  Per session  Per diem 0  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. _____ Purchased services  High quality staff $0.00 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $0.00 _____ ____ _____ _____ _____ $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 17 School Name PS 006 Norma Adams Clemons Academy Borough Brooklyn School Number 006 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ms. Sharon Porter Coach Ms. Tatia Allen ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Suzette Compas Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Rita Joseph - Technology Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Marina Darling-Visual Arts Related-Service Provider Ms. Cheryl Hall - Speech Superintendent Mr. Clarence Ellis Assistant Principal Ms. Rohonnie Prashad Coach Ms. Gracelyn Ralph School Counselor Ms. Kimberly Brown Parent Ms. Donna Dunbar-PTA President Parent Coordinator Mr. Samuel Narvaez Field Support Center Staff Member Ms. Marie Bastien Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 7 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 698 Total number of ELLs 146 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 20.92% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 4 0 3 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses Fountas & Pinnell Assessments for Independent Reading Levels as an assessment for early literacy skills. Many of our ELLs independent reading levels are below grade level and/or approaching grade level in grades K-5. Struggling ELLs are monitoring their reading using reading strategies such as context clues, picture clues, sequencing, peer support, chunking, while they read. The school uses the data to inform instruction by embedding reading skills and strategies in our grade-wide curriculum in ELA and content areas. During instruction, teachers teach mini-lessons using realia in order to engage and promote understanding and vocabulary acquisition. As students read independently, teachers conference with students to record their progress on applying the new skill and/or strategy. Also, Grades K through 2 teachers are trained in Fundations. This program show teachers how to use phonics-based 3  approaches as well as how to employ the multisensory techniques of teaching and learning. Students in K - 5, engage in on demand TC Writing task in order to identify their strengths and weaknesses in the writing traits. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In order to support this effort, we have identified the human resources to assess students in the literacy. In addition, we have created a calendar of events to support assessments. Once assessments have been collected, teams analyze the results in order to identify next steps for students. In addition, the classrooms maintain a data wall which reflects students daily skill acquisition in literacy and math. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Summative assessments being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need: - NYSESLAT - NYC Performance Tasks - ELL Periodic Assessment - GoMath Beginning of Year Assessment - GoMath Baseline - GoMath Benchmark - NYS CCSS ELA & Math 2017 Exams - iReady 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the data has been aggregated and disseminated, students are grouped by grade and proficiency levels. Based on the number of minutes students require, they are scheduled and receive services as needed. Monitoring of skill acquisition is continuous but formative moving forward. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school uses on-going data from grade-wide assessments, F & P Reading Assessment, unit assessments, NYSESLAT, and statewide assessments to identify and monitor our bottom third students (at-risk, ELLs, SWDs). Teachers and RTI providers have data conversations with administration about their students to determine if they need Tier 2 and Tier 3 interventions as well as the current Tier 1 interventions provided in the classroom. Next, we provide the bottom third with additional Tier 1 services such as RTI (AIS) pull out for ELA and Math during the day, in kindergarten and grade 1. Second graders receive intensive support from the Universal Literacy program and coach. Bottom third in grades 3 through 5 attend Literacy & Math Common Core Afterschool to receive additional interventions in ELA and Math. ELLs who scored Entering, Emerging and/or Transistional in all grade will attend ELL (English Language Learner Afterschool) but not limiting to Expanding and Commanding students. The teachers will provide additional interventions using ESL instruction and/or native language instruction if needed to ensure that the students will benefit from the intervention. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We use the NYSESLAT data to evaluate the success of our ELL program. ELLs in all grades attend this afterschool program which support ELLs in all four modalities - Speaking, Listening, Reading and Writing. We also use the data from NYS ELA, NYS Math, and NYS Science assessment to evaluate the success of our ELA & Math Common Core Afterschool program. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Currently, we meet weekly with ENL support staff to review EDAT findings and Periodic Assessment data, brainstorm instructional strategies, identify needs, identify ways to support TIER one instruction. 4  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ENL students receive the required instructional minutes through the integrated model (90-360 minutes per week, depending on language proficiency level). An ENL teacher works with ELLs during content instruction in collaboration with regular classroom teachers to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support while retaining content instruction time. Freestanding ENL program is hetergeneous. ELLs are performing in different proficiency levels. A certified ENL teacher provide the instruction to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ESL teachers plan carefully with general education teachers to ensure curricular alignment. All ELL students are held to the same high academic standards as their monolingual counterparts. All students including ELLs participate in a 120 minute literacy block, which incorporate the components of the balance literacy program, including read aloud, shared reading, guided reading, partner reading and the writing workshop in ENL. Two units of study, per week, from the CR-Part 154, are embedded into the literacy block for all ELLs. Time allocations have been programmed as per the following: - Entering and Emerging = 360 minutes per week - Transitioning and Expanding = 180 minutes per week - Commanding = 90minutes Instruction is provided to whole class, small group and individual when necessary. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Curriculum and instruction at our school are closely aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL teachers and classroom teachers work collaboratively to ensure that literacy and language development are integrated with content instruction. We focus on increasing the academic language proficiency of all students, particularly our ENLs. Teachers of ENL students use the scaffolding strategies to strengthen reading and writing performance across content areas. Our ENL teachers use visuals and hands on materials to support and extend our students’ emerging academic vocabularies. Our school has an ENL inquiry team that analyzes data to design instruction specifically to meet the identified needs of our ENL students. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 5  N/A 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. SIFE students receive rigorous grade level instruction in all content areas, taught in English. ELLs that are in US schools for less than three years and are entering, emerging and transitional students will receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week, in compliance with CR Part 154-2 instructional requirements. All expanding students will receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week, in compliance with CR Part 154-2 instructional requirements. Our school provide rigorous grade level instruction fully aligned with the SED ESL Learning Standards and SED NLA Standards in all content areas. We provide afterschool programs, ELL and Saturday School. All special needs ELLs with IEPs are provided with the related services which include Speech Therapy, Occupational Therapy, Physical Therapy, Guidance Counseling and/or SETSS. In some instances, speech therapy is provided in Spanish. ELL testing accommodations for ELLs are provided during all assessments. SIFE students will receive researched based programs and Leveled Literacy Intervention to promote new language acquisition in English. On-line programs such as iReady, will be another source of intervention. B. Our Newcomers (ELLs in school less than three years) receive support in all areas of their educational endeavor. As a result of HLIS, NYSITELL & NYSESLAT data, newcomers are placed in their appropriate setting by parental options. Once placed in an organizational model the ELLs are given mandated instruction in ENL per week as per CR Part 154-2 instructional requirements. In addition, the ELLs are immersed in a variety of school-wide programs such as afterschool - Literacy and Math Common Core Afterschool, Sports and non-instructional activities such as Chess. ELL testing accommodations for ELLs are provided during all assessments. The newcomers receive researched-based programs and Leveled Literacy Intervention to promote English language acquisition. C. Our Developing ELLs receiving service 4 to 6 years receive support in all areas of their educational path. As a result, NYSESLAT is used to plan instruction for these students according to areas of needs across the four modalities – listening/speaking and reading/writing. Once placed in an organizational model, the students remain in their program and are given the mandated instruction in ENL per week as per CR Part 154 instructional requirements. In addition, the students are immersed in a variety of school-wide programs such as afterschool - Literacy and Math Common Core Afterschool. Students that are in testing grades continue to receive academic intervention based on data received from assessments (formative & summative) in small-group instruction and ELL testing accommodations are provided during all assessments. D. Long-Term ELLs are provide rigorous grade level instruction fully aligned with the SED ESL Learning Standards and SED NLA Standards in all content areas. We provide afterschool programs from Title III. Ells that have special needs or IEPs are given their appropriate related services which may include SETSS, Speech Therapy, Physical Therapy, and Guidance Counseling. ELL testing accommodations are provided during all assessments. We offer intervention programs & Leveled Literacy Intervention as well as on-line programs. E. Our Former ELLs who tested Proficient/Commanding on the NYSESLAT continue to receive the recommended ENL instruction 90 minutes for the next two years. Former ELLs-SWDs are given their appropriate related services which may include SETSS, Speech Therapy, Physical Therapy, and Guidance Counseling. In addition, Former ELLs are afforded opportunities for Literacy & Math Common Core Afterschool. ELL testing accommodations for Former ELLs are provided for the next two years during all assessments. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs whose IEP mandates ESL instruction receive integrated ENL to build English language skills through content area instruction. It is delivered by a certified ENL teacher. Two units of study per week (360 minutes) are delivered to ELL-SWDs 6  who are entering or emerging. 1 unit of study per week (180 minutes) are delivered to ELLs-SWDs who are transitioning, expanding and commanding. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Teachers of ELL-SWD and ENL teachers create a flexible schedule to meet the needs of ENL units of study per week for ELL-SWDs. In grades K - 5, the ELL-SWDs that are in a 12:1, and ICT settings, receive push-in services as per the required CR Part 154-2 in addition to their IEP mandates. Teachers of ELL-SWD, ENL teachers, RTI providers and out-of-the-classroom teachers have access to ELL-SWDs' IEP on SESIS. The entire school uses reading and writing program, such as, ReadyGen, TC Writing Project . Each grade level, consultants provide professional development on each unit of study. ENL teachers and SWDs teachers use a variety of strategies and ESL methodologies to support ELL-SWDs in reading and writing. ENL is embedded within the curriculum and ENL teachers plan out teaching points and language objectives using all 4 modalities - Speaking, Listening, Reading and Writing in all content areas. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. In K - 2: ELLs are supported with: - Fundations - Fountas and Pinnell - Universal Literacy Reading Resource Library - AIS pull out service - Title iii afterschool program - Extra curricula activities that enhances social language and vocabulary Grades 3 - 5 ELLs are supported with: - Fountas and Pinnell - Common Core Academy - AIS pull out service - Title iii afterschool program - Extra curricula activities that enhances social language and vocabulary 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the 2017 - 2018 school year we are incorporating TC Writing, where teachers enhances their craft in teaching students to become better writers. We're also incorporating parts of the reading workshop, hence our students will work on developing stamina, and independence. We've incorporated an arts curriculum, where students will participate in assemblies to showcase their talents and enhance public speaking. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Using the NYSESLAT data, applications are given to ELLs (priority for Entering, Emerging and Transitioning ELLs). The curriculum encompasses a continuation of reading and writing units however, lessons are planned around the four modalities - Speaking, Listening, Reading and Writing. ELLs who are entering, emerging and transitioning are offered to attend ELL afterschool 7  program. If there are available seats, then it is offered to ELLs that are expanding and then commanding level. Gr 3 - 5 Literacy and Math Common Core Afterschool program are afforded to ELLs on Wednesdays and Thursdays. The teachers use data from assessments to select ELLs to participate in the afterschool program. The afterschool program target English language acquisition in Reading (all content area), Writing and Math. All after school programs, instructional, sports and non-instructional such as chess dance are open to all students. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Literacy: - ReadyGen - TC Writing - Fountas & Pinnell - Fundations - MyOn - iReady Mathematics: - GoMath - EngageNY Social Studies - Passport - Museum partnership Science - Harcourt/FOSS - Partnership with the Environmental Center 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? N/A 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The required services support and resources do correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels as a result of the data that is aggregated from Reading & Writing Assessments, Unit Assessments, NYSITELL, NYSESLAT and other grade-wide school made assessments are used to provide interventions and enrichment for the ELLs 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). There are a variety of activities in our school to assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. After early registration, parent orientations are held for new enrolled ELLs and their parents prior to September. A school walk-through is provided after the orientation to familiarize both students and parents with the school procedures, setting, teachers, curriculum, program options (ENL, TBE or DL), assessments and expectations. Then in September and May, there is Family Curriculum Night to explore and learn more about the grade's curriculum or next year's grade curriculum. The parent 8  coordinator has an open line of communication with all parents including ELLs by providing workshops regularly in the areas related to ELLs, testing, Cookshop & etc. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? There are a variety of on-going professional development workshops offered to all personnel. All personnel are supported through participating in Professional Development workshops conducted by outside vendors as well as in-house professional development (e.g. Chancellor Days, Lunch & Learns and etc) in effort to improve instruction for all our ELLs. When a staff member attends a workshop relating to servicing ELLs, the staff returns to the school and turn-keys the information for all personnel in the school. The members of Committee of Special Education attend workshops as well as and turn-key Special Education information regarding IEPs, SESIS and referral process requested by administrators. Also: 1. ENL teachers meet on a weekly basis for inquiry 2. ENL Teachers analyze and discuss the language progressions as it pertains to the grade level. 3. ENL Teachers attend Professional Development given by district 4. ENL Teachers support each other through mentoring 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All teachers and paraprofessionals are given a minimum 15% of total hours of ELL training . The on-going training include professional developments through attending workshops out of school, as well as in-house workshops from certified TESOL teachers using ESL methodologies. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Teachers set up meetings with parents on individual basis. Teachers set up meetings with parents to find ways to assist and support them if a student is Promotion-in-Doubt If translators are needed, on-site translators will be available. If not, over-the-phone translation services will be utilized. 9  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Research shows the multiple benefits that result when parents are actively involved in their children’s education. The relationship between our school and our family is the backbone of our community. Our parents are actively involved in their children’s educational careers. In our school we have an open door policy in the classrooms so our parents participate in activities including curriculum night, parent orientations (fall & spring) , workshops (e.g. Homework help, NYS ELA & Math test & etc), assembly programs, science fairs, field trips, and Cookshop for parents . Parents in need of translation services will be available upon request prior to the engagement of activities via notices or use over-the-phone translation service. The parent coordinator is available during the school wide activities to assist parents as well as resolve matters. The parent coordinator also conducts parent workshops and monthly meeting for parents of ELL students. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Sharon Porter, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 006 School DBN: 17K006 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Sharon Porter Title Principal Rohonnie Prashad Assistant Principal Samuel Narvaez Parent Coordinator Suzette Compas ENL/Bilingual Teacher Donna Dunbar Parent Rita Joseph Teacher/Subject Area Marina Darling Teacher/Subject Area Tatia Allen Gracelyn Ralph Coach Coach Kimberly Brown School Counselor Clarence Ellis Marie Bastien N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Marie Bastien Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/12/17 9/12/17 9/12/17 9/12/17 9/12/17 9/12/17 9/12/17 9/12/17 9/12/17 9/12/17 9/12/17 9/12/17 N/A N/A N/A 2  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 17K006 School Name: PS 006 Superintendent: Clarence Ellis The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Rohonnie Prashad AP Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Various sources provide our school with information about the different home languages of our students and our translation needs for conferences, parent orientation and school notices, they include: Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS); Emergency Blue Contact Cards; Home-School Student Information Sheet (teachers give out to the parents); ATS system provides information of the primary language of the student (RHLA); ATS system provides information of the Adult Preferred Language Report (RAPL); Parent Coordinator interviews; Informal oral communication with parents and teachers as well as Attendance in PTA meetings. The data collected from RHLA is compiled into a spreadsheet by class and grade level and it is quarterly updated when new enroll ELLs and/or transferred students are admitted to the school. During the enrollment process, the parents are screened and must complete the HLIS Questionnaire and indicate their spoken and written language. They indicate and record their spoken and written on the Blue Emergency cards too. The pupil accountant secretary records onto the ATS (RAPL) the adult's preferred language in spoken and written language. The pupil accountant secretary generates the RAPL report by class and give them to the 3  teachers so they could determine if their parents require assistance with translation services. The classroom teachers also send out Home-School Student information letters (teacher survey) which include address, telephone numbers, parent's preferred spoken and written language too. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali French Fulani Haitian Creole Vietnamese English Spanish 17 5 7 2 44 2 563 117 2.25 .66 .93 .26 5.83 .26 74.57 15.5 17 6 7 3 50 2 553 119 2.25 .79 .93 .04 6.62 .26 73.25 15.76 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. The parent's preferred languages for both written and oral communication include the following: English, Spanish, Creole, Arabic, Bengali, and Vietnamese. The parents' preferred languages are collected from the ATS (RHLA), teachers' surveys, and Home Emergency Contact cards. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Monthly calendars Monthly Parent Monthly Newsletters Monthly Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Other Staff members will translate or use the translation services provided by DOE Other Staff members will translate or use the translation services provided by DOE 4  School Trip Forms Ongoing State Wide ELA & Math Test meetings January Home Language Identification Surveys Ongoing Parent Selection & Parent Survey Forms Ongoing Entitlement Letters; & Continuing Letters Ongoing Parents Handbook September Other Staff members will translate or use the translation services provided by DOE Other Staff members will translate or use the translation services provided by DOE Other Staff members will translate or use the translation services provided by DOE Other Staff members will translate or use the translation services provided by DOE Other Staff members will translate or use the translation services provided by DOE Other Staff members will translate or use the translation services provided by DOE 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum Night PTC PTC 09/13 11/16 03/15 Parent Tuesday Every Tuesday Individual Meetings As needed interpretation service(s)? Person to Person staff member, Over the Phone Translation Person to Person staff member, Over the Phone Translation Person to Person staff member, Over the Phone Translation Person to Person staff member, Over the Phone Translation Person to Person staff member, Over the Phone Translation 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, if we need to notify parents, we are able to send out "Robo Call" as well as text notification in certain languages. However, in cases that are less pressing, we rely on writing letters in all the languages. This process is supported by staff members that speak and write the language and the use of Translation Services. 5  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Welcome Poster are posted in the front entrance of the school. The Parents' Bill of Rights & Parents Guide to Language Access is distributed to parents by the child's teacher in their preferred written language and/or during meetings and conferences. Language ID Guide will be at the security desk and main office in the event over-the-phone translation services is necessary in a language other than our on-site translators speak. All the notification documentation can be found at the Translation and Interpretation Unit's intranet site: http://intranet.nycboe.net/schoolsupport/translation_and_interpretation unit. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Each staff member (including CSE - e.g., speech teacher, OT & PT & etc.) is given T & I Brochure so they could have access to over-the-phone interpretation services especially if the language is not spoken by one of our on-site translators. Also they have "I speak .. " card to determine the parents' home language. The pupil accounting secretary, the guidance counselor, the parent coordinator & family worker could use the Language ID Guide to determine the language of the child and the parent if they are meeting them for the first time. If the language is not spoken by one of our on-site translators, then he/she will call 718-752-7373 to get over-the-phone interpretation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? On ATS, the school uses the information from RAPL (Adult Preferred Language Report) to determine the languages preferred written as well as oral. We use the data from the learning environment surveys that parents fill out in March to improve our communication with parents. During SLT (School Leadership Team) meetings, the committee (including parents, teachers and administrators) discuss ways to gather feedback from parents and promote best practices to ensure that all cultures and languages are represented in our school. 6 
