 16K025 School Name: P.S. 025 EUBIE BLAKE SCHOOL Principal: ANITA COLEY   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S.25-The Eubie Blake School 16K025 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: 331600010025 Pre-K-5 787 Lafayette Avenue 718-574-2336 School Number (DBN): 718-455-5838 Fax: School Contact Person: Email Address: Anita Coley Acoley2@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Anita Coley Diana Watson DarcyGriffin Diana Watson Robles Guzman N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 16 Rahesha Amon Superintendent: 1010 Lafayette Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11221 Superintendent’s Office Address: RAmon@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 574-2834 (718) 453-1048 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-2337 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Anita Coley Diana Watson Darcy Griffin CarvoidiousNewman Rudles Guzman N/A N/A N/A Sharon Green Crystal Williams *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Staff Parent   Darcy Griffin KizzyHolder ArabellaOrtiz Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Vision Section 4: CEP Overview To enable all of our students to become lifelong learners, responsible citizens and valuable and contributing members of the global community in which they live. Our vision embraces the philosophy of a “School-of-One” where every single child is differentiated for based on his/her needs and interests; where each child is seen as the only child in the   school; where learning is personalized for every child and where every must know that there is at least one adult in the building who knows hisher story and cares deeply about himher. Mission: The Mission of PS 25 is to provide a collaborative, meaningful and rigorous standards driven educational experience for all students, parents, teachers and staff in a safe, caring and intellectually stimulating “children first” environment. Opportunities are provided to promote academic excellence, maximize student achievement in all areas, develop characteristics associated with good citizenship, scholarship and team participation as students learn today to lead tomorrow . 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Special Features: Culture and Climate PS 25 The Eubie Blake School is a caring community in which our commitment to children and their development – academically, social, and emotionally – drives the work of the school. We are committed to engaging children of diverse backgrounds and cultures (including SWD, ELLs and boys) in differentiated instruction based on interests and needs. We believe that ongoing assessment is crucial to teaching and learning. This is supported by an inquiry approach, in which staff works collaboratively to examine data and look for school-wide trends to be addressed, as well as ensuring that individual student’s needs are recognized and accommodated. Our curriculum is guided by rigorous Common Core Learning Standards. Our school is also defined by a culture of celebrations. To name a few, we celebrate our diverse cultures, progress, birthdays of various stakeholders. Collaborative Teachers The genuine collaborative spirit that exists at P. S. 25 allows for teachers to meet on an ongoing basis to engage in collaborative discussion with their colleagues. Structures are in place for teachers to engage in common grade team planning and cross grade team planning. teachers also collaborate as grade teams to look closely at student work. Teachers also work as a grade team for students to perform at the monthly assemblies. Supportive Environment Teachers are encouraged to have students foster collaborative discussions in their classroom in a caring and supporting environment where students feel safe and not afraid to take risks. Teachers are encouraged to take a leadership role and share exemplary practices in a supportive learning environment. The Socratic Seminar that is used 0  in the classroom and during professional development workshops help to foster a supportive learning environment where participants views the experience as an opportunity to enhance their professional growth. Rigorous Instruction Our school use the city's Common Core aligned GoMath and Ready Gen curriculum to provide students with rigorous instruction.. Students are actively engaged in intellectual discourse through the use of Socratic Seminars. The use of higher order questioning and engaging students in a variety of discussion techniques. Across grades, students work collaboratively in solving multi-step problems. The school has invested in technology equipment to ensure that students engage in research and college and career readiness activities. The school has a one-to-one laptop program for students, each classroom is equipped with multiple iPads, the computer lab has an updated collection of desktops and classrooms are equipped with Kindles. Strong Family Community Ties There are monthly Curriculum Teas and parents workshops to foster strong Community Ties. Parents are also invited to participate in the monthly assemblies , Multicultural Day, Grandparents Day, Annual Health Fair and other events. Partnerships such as PricewaterhouseCoopers, NSA, The Lions Clubs of Brooklyn, Medgar Evers Pipeline Initiative, Urban Dove to name a few are all designed to build strong Family Community Ties. Effective School Leadership The Principal facilitates as well as participate in ongoing Collaborative Professional Learning along with the teachers, she meets with staff for initial, mid-year and end of year planning to help them identify areas of strength and areas of growth through ongoing cycle of observations and actionable feedback . The principal supports the development and delivery of instruction through conversations, celebrations and recognition of staff achievement. The principal has put in place systems and structures to allow teachers to work collaboratively and support each others' work.The principal models the use of protocol and encourages teachers to use these protocols to enhance their work in order to improve students' learning outcomes. Trust Teachers are respectful of each others work. They visit their colleagues’ classroom and view each other work in a supportive, free and trusting learning environment. Parents, teachers and all staff members are committed to the school’s Vision and Mission as all members of the learning community work together to create a trusting and caring learning environment to enhance the academic and social and emotional development of students. Partnerships P.S 25 engages in ongoing collaborative partnerships with organizations such as: Activity Works, Learning Leaders, Gift of Sight, Hip Hop Public Health, Safety City, Shape-Up New York, PENCIL, Pricewaterhousecoopers, NSA Supermarket, Urban Dove, Family Center, Verizon, Urban Dove, Men’s Lions Club. Our collaborative partnerships support our school community in a variety of ways, including the social, emotional, intellectual and all round growth and development. of our students, The Morgan Library Museum, Morgan Book Project: Arts at the Core of Collaboration and Cross Curricular Skills program. Celebrations At P. S. 25, activities are planned throughout the school year to celebrate both staff and students. In the Weekly Teachers’ Memo teachers and educational assistants are constantly recognized for their hard work. The principal also distributes Commendation Cards to staff to celebrate and recognize their efforts. Students are recognized at the monthly assembly for outstanding academic performance in the different subject areas and for attendance. Students also participate in Multicultural Day activities, Annual Health Fair, Club 25, Field Day, Reading is also celebrated 1  through the Cool Men Read Day and Diva Darlings Read day. The Talent Show and the Awards Day ceremony where efforts are made to ensure that every student is celebrated and receives and award for his or her work. Parents are celebrated for their children's one hundred percent attendance on a monthly basis, Breakfast with the Principal, Grand Parents' Day and Parent Appreciation Dinners. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Academic Intervention Services (AIS) is a major focus of our school, targeting students (SWD, ELLs, boys) in Grades Kindergarten through 5 who require additional academic support, provided by classroom teachers, Cluster Teachers and Educational Assistants. They provide individual, small-group, and push-in instruction to support students who are struggling in any subject area. At P.S. 25, we have selected the first period every day as a dedicated block for AIS as well as specific periods throughout each day. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Collaboration Collaboration is a key feature at P. S. 25. We proudly boast of this strength. Teachers consistently engage in collaborative work with their colleagues. The administrative staff has allotted time in the schedule for teachers to meet with their colleagues to plan on grade level as well as across grade levels. Teachers have an opportunity to share effective teaching practices. To this end, based on the discussions from the cross grade planning meetings the teachers took the initiative to prepare students for the next grade by teaching topics that they know their students will encounter in the next grade. During the grade team meeting, the teachers also have opportunity to look at student work and plan lessons and common assessments together as a team. Teachers also participate in Intervisitation where they visit their colleagues' classrooms with an instructional focus, give each other feedback and support each others professional growth and development. Over the last three years P. S. 25 has adopted the new Framework for Great Schools as an integral part of our work. This model has supported our growth in the following ways: Rigorous Instruction Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core Standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills in order to prepare them for college and career. The use of technology is embedded in daily classroom instruction in order to give students the opportunity to become proficient in 21st century skills and be ready for college and career. Collaborative Teachers Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their students. They consistently collaborate with each other. This gives them opportunities to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. The school has a structure for horizontal and Vertical collaboration among teachers. During these collaborations teachers plan lessons, review, revise and adjust curriculum, develop rubrics, look at students' work and much more. Our monthly Curriculum Teas and assemblies are all planned as a team. During the Monday PD blocks teachers meet with team members to engage in professional dialogue with their colleagues. The AIS providers are also part of the grade team planning. This collaborative spirit at P. S. 25 helps to foster coherence across the grade and ensures that the students in all the grades are receiving the same quality education.In this same spirit of collaboration, we partner 2  with parents and multiple community based organizations to enhance our school community and promote our students readiness for college and career. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 16K025 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 102 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 21 20 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 25 24 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 99.0% % Attendance Rate 98.0% % Reduced Lunch 11.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 23.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 10.04 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 50.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 82% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 14 14 6 87.8% 1.0% 23.5% 68.6% 3.9% 0.0% 2 5% 5.7 70.7% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. High rigorous standards are set In every classroom at PS 25. Instruction is customized and aligned to the NYS Common Core Standards. Based on the NYC School Survey gains were shown in school safety, and classroom behavior. Based on the most recent Quality Review report, in the area of School culture and environment PS 25 received a rating of Proficient. The priority need that will be addressed is strong-family-community ties. According to the School Quality Guide, PS 25 scored a 3.53 in 2017-18. We will address this by continuing to partner with businesses in the community. Based on the School Quality Review, PS 25 scored a 3.86 in rigorous instruction in 2017-18. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 90 teachers 3rd - 5th grade teachers will triangulate and analyze various data sources such as; the June Instructional Report, the Mid Year Exams and the Mock Exam to identify areas of student needs in Math and instructional gaps in order to provide Rigorous instruction aligned to the Common Core Math Standards. This will result in a 3% increase in student performance on the NYS Mathematics exams from 71% to 74% as measured by the results reported on this exam. 5 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018 – June 2019 SETTS Teacher, Cluster Teachers, AIS Team, classroom teachers, Assistant Principal and Principal Students performing in levels 1 and 2 including students with disabilities and and students receiving ESL services Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Implementation of a supportive teacher professional development calendar that supports teachers and educational assistants during weekly and monthly meetings in developing their skills in teaching Reading. Daily use of Common Core aligned program; ReadyGen with some adaptations and adjustments. Use of the Junior Great books program for Socratic Seminars to engage students in discussions and questioning techniques. Continued implementation of the researched based Writing program - The Collins Five Types of Writing with modifications and adjustments for SWD and ESL learners.. Continued implementation of A ninety-minute ELA block with Cluster teachers being programmed to push-in and provided additional support - reading intervention in each classroom for at-risk readers including students with disabilities and ESL learners. Pearson Targeted Reading Intervention program. Cluster teachers and intervention Paraprofessionals will be programmed to push-in for targeted tutoring in reading with and Mathematics for students with disabilities and ESL learners. 6  The use of i-Ready Assessments and differentiated individualized instruction program that delivers targeted instruction and helps teachers understand student performance and gain insight into their learning needs. The use of Tutormate will assist struggling students with ELA (phonics, phonemic awareness, word study. The use of EverFi will assist students grades 3-5 with ELA and Math. The SETTS teacher is programmed to push-in/pull-out and provide targeted intervention for mandated and non-mandated students, during the regular school day. Per session funds have been scheduled for teachers and Para-professionals for Saturday Academy and After school classes. Continued Intensive academic intervention will be provided to students performing in Levels 1 and 2 during the school day, extended day time, After school and Saturday Academy. Class size will also be reduced to improve students' learning outcomes. Students performing in levels 1 and 2 September 2018 – June 2019 Monthly Parent Workshops: Curriculum Teas, Cornell Wellness Nutrition series, Study Skills, Reading with your child, Non- Fiction texts, CCLS overview, NYC School’s Account. Other Events: Monthly Writing Celebrations, Monthly Attendance Celebration, Monthly Progress Report, Daily Homework assignment, Math Exploration Day, Field Trips. Parents are invited to be involved in all the above school activities Students performing in levels 1 and 2 September 2018 – June 2019 SETTS Teachers, Cluster Teachers, AIS Team, classroom teachers, Title 1 funds for per session, providing instruction after school and Saturday programs as well as the AIS teachers SETTS Teachers, Cluster Teachers, AIS Team, classroom teachers, Title 1 funds for per session, providing instruction after school and Saturday programs as well as the AIS teachers, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Cafeteria and Administration 7  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Guidance Counsellor, Parent Coordinator and Teacher Teams will engage families in monthly workshops in order to support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core in order to support their children at home Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The SETTS teacher has been programmed to push-in/pull-out targeted intervention for targeted students, during the regular school day. Per session funds have been scheduled for eight teachers and three Para professionals for Saturday Academy and After school classes. Continued Intensive academic intervention will be provided to students performing in Levels 1 and 2 during the school day, extended day time, After school and Saturday Academy. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be at least a 3% increase in the number of grade 3-5 students, including ELLs and students with disabilities achieving proficiency on the Fountas and Pinnel running records assessments Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) In February 2019, we will review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable.  Monthly Fountas and Pinnel running records results  Students progress from baseline assessments in ELA compared to mid-year assessments in ELA Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? PS 25 establishes a school culture where students feel safe and supported. The students are challenged by their teachers. The results from the 2018-2019 NYS Math exams and our most recent baseline assessment in Mathematics demonstrate a need for our students to show continued improvement in Mathematics. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 90% of teachers will participate in the school's implementation of a comprehensive professional development program including, Guided Reading and The Five Types of Writing protocol to support teachers with instructional tools and strategies. These will occur during weekly and monthly collaborative learning times to develop the teachers' pedagogical skills and content knowledge. This will result in, at least a 3% increase in the number of grades 3-5 students with disabilities achieving proficiency on the New York State Exam as measured by the results reported from the 2018-2019 NYS exam. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Daily use of Common Core aligned program; GoMath, Pearson Targeted Math Intervention program. Cluster teachers will be programmed to push-in for targeted tutoring in Math. A ninety-minute Math block has been programmed to push-in and provide Math intervention in each classroom for students at risk. The SETTS teacher has been programmed to push-in/pull-out targeted intervention for targeted students, during the regular school day. Per session funds have been scheduled for 8 teachers and three Para-professionals for Saturday Academy and After school classes. Continued Intensive academic intervention will be provided to students performing in Levels 1 and 2 during the school day, extended day time, after school and Saturday Academy Monthly Parent Workshops, Curriculum Teas, Cornell Wellness Nutrition series, Study Skills, Reading with your child, Non- Fiction texts, CCLS overview, NYC School’s Account. Other Events: Monthly Writing Celebrations, Monthly Attendance Celebration, Monthly Progress Report, Daily Homework assignment, Math Exploration Day and Field Trips. Parents are invited to be involved in all the above school activities Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018– June 2019 Students performing in levels 1 and 2 English Language Learners Students performing in levels 1 and 2 September 2018– June 2019 Students performing in levels 1 and 2 September 2018– June 2019 SETTS Teachers, Cluster Teachers, AIS Team, classroom teachers, Title 1 funds for Per session, providing instruction after school and Saturday programs as well as the AIS teachers SETTS Teacher, Cluster Teachers, AIS Team, classroom teachers, Assistant Principal and Principal. SETTS Teachers, Cluster Teachers, AIS Team, classroom Teachers, Title 1 funds for Per session, providing instruction after school and Saturday programs as well as the AIS teachers, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Cafeteria and Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 0  The Parent Coordinator will invite CBOs to present various parents workshops. Grade team leaders will also facilitate professional development sessions for Parents and parents will participate in our six-week cycles of Writing Collaborations Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The SETTS teacher has been programmed to push-in/pull-out targeted intervention for targeted students, during the regular school day. Per session funds will be scheduled for three teachers and three Para-professionals for After school classes. Continued Intensive academic intervention will be provided to students performing in Levels 1 and 2 during the school day, morning Intervention time, After school and Saturday Academy. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG X X Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be at least a 3% increase in the number of grades 3-5 students with disabilities and English Language Learners achieving proficiency in Mathematics as measured by the results from formative and interim assessments implemented by the school. The assessments used will include tests, homework, and analyzing student work. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable as measured by the results from formative and interim assessments implemented by the school. Students will take a mid-term exam to measure their progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Formal and informal observations  Teachers worked collaboratively, planning, looking at student work on an ongoing basis and exchanging ideas. Students made significant gains in ELA. However, students did not make the same significant gains in MATH. Our finding is that when teachers work collaboratively looking at students work, assessing, planning and giving each other feedback, the students make significant gains. For this school year, teachers will mirror the same collaborative work in MATH. Our analysis of students' performance on our most recent State Exams shows that:  Our students made 10% gain in Mathematics however, need to continue showing progress.  In ELA our students showed 21% increase. However, only 50% of our students are meeting proficiency levels in ELA. This indicates a need to continue improving students' learning outcomes in this content area In targeted sub-groups such as our ELLs and SWD there is a need to continue implementing rigorous instruction in order to improve students learning outcome  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least, 85% of teachers will collaboratively design and execute lessons that will effectively engage students in the use of academic Language and rigorous discourse in order to increase our students' critical thinking skills and content knowledge. This will result in at least a 3% increase in 3rd-5th students' performance on the NYS ELA exams and a 3% increase in the number of students reading on or above reading levels on the Fountas and Pinnell running record assessment 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Daily use of Common Core aligned program; ReadyGen and Junior Great books reading program. Pearson Targeted Reading Intervention program. Cluster teachers will be programmed to push-in for targeted tutoring in reading. A ninety-minute ELA block has been programmed to push-in and provide reading intervention in each classroom for students at risk. The SETTS teacher has been programmed to push-in/pull-out targeted intervention for targeted students, during the regular school day. per session funds have been scheduled for 8 teachers and three Para-professionals for Saturday Academy and after school classes. All students including Students performing in levels 1 and 2 slippables and pushables in levels 3 and 4 September 2018 – June 2019 Reading Coach, Classroom teachers, Cluster teachers. SETTS teacher and paraprofessional Dr. Wilson, the Assistant Principal, will oversee each initiative. Monthly Parent Workshops: Curriculum Teas, , Cornell Wellness Nutrition series, Study Skills, Reading with your child, Non- Fiction texts, CCLS overview, NYC School’s Account. Other Events: Monthly Writing Celebrations, Monthly Attendance Celebration, Monthly Progress Report, Daily Homework assignment, Math Exploration Day, Field Trips. Parents are invited to be involved in all the above school activities All Parents September 2018 – June 2019 SETTS Teachers, Cluster Teachers, AIS Team, classroom teachers, Title 1 funds for per session, providing instruction after school and Saturday programs as well as the AIS teachers N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Class parents will be selected in the Fall. Parents will participate in six-week cycles of Writing Collaborations Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 3  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher per session may be used to achieve this goal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG X X Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the school will use monthly student progress reports , interim, formative and summative assessments, to assess whether or not there is evidence that there is at least a 3% increase in the number of grade 3-5 students, with disabilities who have made progress towards achieving proficiency on the New York State Math Exam. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data collected from : Formal and informal observations   Daily Walk-throughs  2017-2018 summative planning conferences  2017-2018 Initial Planning conference  Continued use of the Common Core aligned GoMath and ReadyGen Curricula with modifications and adjustments based on students' needs and teachers pedagogical skills  2017-2018 NYS Common Core ELA and MATH results 50% in ELA and 53% in Mathematics  2017-2018 4th Grade Science results  National Teacher Network planning and implementation strategies to support teachers pedagogue and student improvement in Mathematics Our analysis of students' performance on our most recent State Exams shows that:  Our students made 18% gain in Mathematics however, there is need for continued progress.  In ELA only 50% of our students are meeting and exceeding proficiency levels in ELA as reported by the NYS exam results for grades 3-5. This indicates a need to continue improving students' learning outcomes in this content area In targeted sub-groups such as our ELLs and SWD we showed unusual improvement. However there is a need to continue implementing rigorous instruction in order to continue impact learning and improve students' learning outcome  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 the administrative team will complete reading, analyzing and studying chapter 6 of the book "Collaborative Leadership" by Peter Dewitt and John Hattie's article from Education Leadership about Levels of "Effective Feedback" in order to give more concise and effective feedback to least 90 % of classroom teachers. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? On-going formal and informal observations Classroom Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Teacher Team Leaders Book Study Grade Team Meetings feedback 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Instructional Cabinet members Administrators Jan 2019-April 2019- Teacher Team Leaders Instructional Cabinet members Administrators, Sept 2018-June 2019 Teacher Team Leaders Teachers Instructional Cabinet members How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will engage parents in at least eight monthly annual Curriculum Teas with the" Principal and the Instructional Cabinet Team." The school will also engage parents in at least one Town Hall style meeting to support them in understanding of Effective School Leadership and Strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Lead teachers and content expert Implementing Afterschool academic programs School-Based Support Team  Reprogramming Cluster Teachers and Educational Assistants for daily Academic Intervention     Use of Common Core aligned curriculum  Per session work by teachers 6   On-site and Off-site professional development for staff Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG X X Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 40% of teachers will be trained in the Restorative Justice protocols in order to support the professional, social/emotional growth of staff to improve learning outcomes for all students including subgroups such as our ELLs, SWDs, and boys. Also, by November 2018 the school will implement the restorative circles social/emotional curriculum in at least 10% of our classrooms. - Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. This will be measured by attendance taken at the professional development sessions. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Comprehensive Assessment Analysis of the students' performance of the NYS ELA and feedback from the school survey indicate writing and instruction as major areas of concerns. To this end, the school has scheduled Parent workshops for parents that are focused on writing. Math activities celebrations have also been planned for students to share their work with parents. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 at least 80% of our teachers will engage in at least 2 activities designed to engage our parents in common Core aligned activities to improve their children's performance as measured by their attendance taken at these events. P.S. 25 will continue to engage all parents (including parents of ELLs, SWDs and boys) in professional development on Tuesday afternoons. Workshops will include topics across all subject areas aligned with CCLS. The school will continue to offer parents the opportunity to participate in our six-week cycles of Writing Celebrations. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Monthly Parent Workshops: Math,Curriculum Teas, Study Skills, Reading with your child, Non Fiction text, CCLS overview, NYC Schools Account, Math Exploration Day, Monthly Progress Reports and Parent Tuesday Engagement activities with teachers.. Parent activities will be facilitated by grade teams, SLT, and Parent Coordinator. Materials and refreshments will be purchased by parent Title 1 funds and other school funds. 09-2018 to 06-2019 Parent Coordinator,Teacher Grade teams, PTA Executive Board,SLT, School Parent Engagement Committee members October-2018 to June-2019 Parent Coordinator,Teacher Grade teams, PTA Executive Board,SLT, School Parent Engagement Committee members Parent Coordinator, Teacher Grade teams, PTA Executive Board, SLT, School Parent Engagement Committee members. Parent monthly attendance of the parent engagement activities will be charted and monitored for progress towards meeting this goal. Parent Coordinator, Teacher Grade teams, PTA Executive Board, SLT, School Parent Engagement Committee members. Parent monthly attendance of the parent engagement activities will be charted and monitored for progress towards meeting this goal. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 9  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. International Center for Leadership in Education (ICLE), NSA, Urban Dove, NY Dental Association, PriceWaterHouse Cooper (PWC) , Morgan Chase - Tutor Mate, Smile New York,, Brooklyn Metropolitan Lions Club, Bedstuy Men's Lions' Club, The Magnolia Tree Project Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Professional Development: Curriculum Teams, Cornell Wellness Nutrition series, Study Skills, Reading with your child, Non Fiction text, CCLS overview, NYC School’s Account. Other Events: Tuesday Parent Engagement Events, Monthly Writing Celebrations, Monthly Attendance Celebration, Monthly Progress Report, Daily Homework assignment, Math Exploration Day, ESL parent workshop, Field Trips, Grand Parents Recognition Day and Parent Appreciation Night. Parents are invited to be involved in all the above school activities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG X X Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 50% of classroom teachers will engage parents in at least one (1) professional development parent activity, such as; " Math Around the Home," unpacking the Common Core Learning Standards and reviewing the grade level major standards K-5, as measured by attendance taken at these events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. The monthly running records Fountas and Pinnell reading levels and the midyear assessments in ELA and Math will be used to measure progress for this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Level 1 and Level 2 students based on the NYS Common Core ELA test. Holdovers “Pushables” and “Slippables” based on the NYS Common Core ELA test. Students with special needs. English Language Learners Mathematics Level 1 and Level 2 students,based on the NYS Common Core Math test. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) The MaxScholar on-line reading intervention program is used daily. The SuccessMaker reading program is used daily for targeted reading skills. ELA Academic Intervention Services is provided by the SETTS(Special Education Support) teacher, Cluster teachers and Classroom teachers. Strategies used include: Guided Reading, the Five Types of Writing protocol, reciprocal reading, questioning techniques, closed reading and targeted skills review. . GoMath Tier 1 and 2 intervention is provided by classroom teachers, clusterteachersand Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Push-in/pull-out small group, one-on-one tutoring. Online computer base intervention programs. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the regular day, extended daytime, Afterschool and Saturday Academy. Push-in/pull-out small group, one-on-one targeted intervention., online platform for Math AIS is provided during the regular day,afteschool and will be provided 1  Holdovers “Pushables” and “Slippables” based on the NYS Common Core Math test. Science Social Studies Students performing below grade level in Science based on teacher observation and assessments. Students performing below grade level in Social Studies based on teacher observation and assessments. the SETTS teacher. TheTargeted Mathematic Intervention program and SuccessMaker Math programs are used. Multiple strategies are used such as: emphasis on the use of manipulatives to provide hands-on experience for students struggling with mathematical concepts, hands-on exploratory projects, re-teaching and the reciprocal teaching method. Science AIS is targeted to our 3rd and 4th graders, close reading, collaborative projects, hands-on activities and a research based science fair project. Social Studies AIS is provided by Science Cluster teacher both in push-in and pull-out services during the regular school assessment and intervention. during Saturday Academy Push-in/pull-out small group, one-on-one and tutoring by clusters and classroom teachers project-based activities. Push-in/pull-out small group, one-on-onetutoringby clusters and classroom teachers project-based activities. AIS is provided during the regular day, extended day time, after school and will be provided in Saturday Academy AIS is provided during the regular day,after school and Saturday Academy day. Classroom teachers provide Tier 1 and Tier 2 interventions place in the classroom (push in, small group) and pull out (small group and individual as the situation warrants.) Project based activities and field trips 2 Individual and small group sessions. During the regular day At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Holdovers Students performing below grade level in all subjects and students who exhibit social and emotional concern. Students recommended by teachers based on their observations. The Guidance Counselor, Social Workers and School Psychologist provide individual counseling, The school also partners with several outside agencies such as New York Psychotherapy, The Puerto Rican Family Institute Inc. and Kings County Hospital to provide at-risk counseling and social services for students and families. 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 23 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Arrange transportation, assist students with tutoring, related services, school supplies,free lunch and personal items as needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. New teachers are hired as per NYC DOE guidelines with consideration for restrictions on specific license areas as well as the excess candidacy pool. All candidates participate in a thorough interview process conducted by a panel of staff from PS 25. Both writing and lesson plan samples are considered along with a two tiered interview process which culminates with authentic performance review of an actual lesson delivery. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). In order to provide opportunities and support for para professionals and teachers’ learning and improved instructional practices, on-going weekly collaborative, differentiated professional learning is facilitated by teachers, administrators, and outside consultants. On/off-site support is offered by partnership consultants including National Urban Alliance, International Center for Leadership in Education, MaxScholar and The Junior Great Books Foundation. Initial and summative planning conferences are held with all teachers for needs assessment and planning for success. Mentor and buddy teachers are assigned to new teachers. Grade teams have scheduled Common and Cross-grade planning and inquiry work time to facilitate the growth and development of all teachers. An Action plan to support professional growth is implemented for new teachers and any under-performing teachers with ratings of "Developing or "Ineffective". Title1 5% funding is allocated to ensure that staff not fully certified can be supported in becoming highly qualified. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. The school provides targeted academic intervention for students at risk of not meeting grade level expectations, through afterschool, our daily morning intervention block, Saturday Academy, guidance support services and attendance initiatives. Students in Temporary Housing (STH) funds have been set aside for educational trips, school supplies, uniforms and social and emotional support for STH. 6  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Educational Assistant and cluster teachers are scheduled multiple periods during the regular school day to push-in and provide targeted academic intervention within the classroom during the regular school day. Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Monthly Parent workshops are held. Monthly Newsletters are sent home to parents informing them of the upcoming curriculum for the month. Monthly progress reports are sent home to parents. Our part-time Pre-K Social Worker conducts workshops with parents to inform them of the prerequisite skills needed for success in Kindergarten. Pre-K students and parents do a June tour of their prospective Kindergarten class. Pre-K and Kindergarten teachers meet monthly for cross grade planning. There is ongoing Intervisitation between the Pre-K teacher and the Kindergarten teacher. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The Early Screening Inventory benchmark assessment is administered by Pre-K teachers in the Fall. Subsequent to this,teachers observe students, collect data and create ongoing assessments which they use to drive their instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 7  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 140,893.00 80,851.00 0 0 1,201,209.00 X x x x x 5A,5B 5A N/A N/A 5D, 5A,5B 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 8  achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 25, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 25 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 0  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality P.S. 25's Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 1  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; P.S. 25 will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 25, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum P.S. 25 will provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships P.S. 25 will support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 3  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; P.S. 25 will provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; P.S. 25 will provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; P.S. 25 Parents will: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 4  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; P.S. 25 Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 5  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 16 School Name The Eubie Blake School Borough Brooklyn School Number 025 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Anita Coley Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Deborah FolarinIrosha Pathirag Teacher/Subject Area Shelladene Holder/GE Teacher/Subject Area Sharon Green/ Prek Related-Service Provider Denise Kentish Superintendent Rahesha Amon Assistant Principal Dr. Esther Wilson Coach N/A School Counselor Angela Cobb Sierra Parent Tanya Fleming Parent Coordinator Rose Morris Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 122 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 9 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.38% 7  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use ongoing assessments and collection of student work to effectively plan for instruction and professional development. Formal assessment tools used to assess early literacy skills include the LAB R, NYSESLAT, ECLAS 2 and students' math and writing portfolios. Informal assessments include conference logs, journals, reading and writing folders, among others. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 8  The success of the ESL program at PS 25 is measured based on ELL students’ NYSESLAT results, their movement from one proficiency level to another, and across the four English language modalities. Also, we analyze all data available across the grades, for example, results of ECLAS 2, Math and ELA predictives, among others. We expect all ELLs to make yearly academic progress on all State and Citywide assessments in lieracy, math, the content areas as well as the NYSESLAT. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Collaborative team support teachers in improving educational outcomes for all students K-5 at PS 25, by meeting together to make decisions leading to improve student achievement. Teaming structures vary and could consist of teachers, administrators, and other educators. Teams plan for students success through Data analysis, curriculum planning, shared by best practices, and discussion of interventional strategies. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Specifically, the NYSESLAT provides us with in depth information about our ELLs. ELLs are making incremental gains on the assessment by moving to the next proficiency level to become language proficient. The LAB-R and NYSESLAT results are used to plan classroom and program instructions. Students who are beginners or intermediate receive 360 minutes of ESL services and those that are advanced receive 180 minutes a week . Most English language learners moved up to the advanced level showing significant improvement. Home languages include a majority of Spanish speaking students, Arabic, and French speaking students. Although ELLs are making steady gains on the NYSESLAT, after looking at students in this program at PS 25 (ESL scores) that across grade levels in reading and writing is where students are having the most difficulties. This correlates with research findings which indicate that productive skills in language acquisition take longer to acquire. It is interesting to note that the majority of our ELL students in grades K to grades 3 are the ones who tested out proficient. In addition, the report shows that an English language learners' performance in the NYSESLAT is a strong predictor of whether he or she will meet standards on the State ELA exam. In fact, the majority of these advanced students scored at level 2 or above on the NYS ELA, Math and Science assessments. It was also noticeable that former ELL students are often out performing the non-ELL students across the grades. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our program implements Freestanding English as a Second Language (ESL) which includes ESL which includes ESL Push-in/ Pullout ESL instruction. All classes are grouped heterogenously with mixed proficiency levels. The language of instruction is English. All ELL students in classes Kindergarten, grades 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 receive ESL instruction as a part of their language development and daily academic instruction. ELLs receive ESL instruction through the Push-in/ Pullout model. The LAB-R and NYSESLAT results are used to plan program instruction. Students who are at beginner 9  or intermediate levels receive 360 minutes a week of ESL services and advanced ELL students receive 180 minutes a week as per CR Part 154. The program follows the heterogenous model in ESL and the homogeneous model by language proficiency within age parameters in the Push-in/ Pullout program. The ESL program model helps ELL students to achieve English language proficiency and attain the standards established for all students for grade promotion and graduation. The primary goal of this program is to amplify the literacy and cognitive/ academic skills by incorporating recognized and researched based ESL instructional strategies across content subject areas so they can perform at city and state grade levels. ESL strategies include but are not limited to: scaffolding, TPR, songs and chants, repetition, graphic organizers (i.e. tables, flowcharts, graphs and story maps), modeling, interactive read aloud, retelling, sequencing, thematic units, language experience approach , academic accountable talk and use of picture dictionaries. Both the Balanced Literacy Model and Go-Math support differentiated instruction to enhance the cognitive linguistic and academic growth of our ELL students. The latter participate in read alouds, independent reading, shared and guided instruction and mini-lessons. ELL students work with challenging and authentic activities that meet their unique learning styles and participate in special events that recognize the diversity of their cultural backgrounds. In addition, we address the students' different learning styles and English language modalities through the use of our Library Center, the computer lab, and promethean white boards to meet their mulitsensory (i.e. visual, auditory and kinestetic) learning needs. Through Rosetta Stone Learning Program, Skills Tutor and Destination Math/ Reading technology based programs we also develop ELLs' linguistic, cognitive and academic skills. Our ELL students across grades K-5 are provided with adequate levels of ESL instruction throughout the school year to accelerate their English language development in the four modalities: listening, reading, writing, and speaking. The school directly provides other support services/ programs that may be needed by ELL students in order to attain English language proficiency and maintain satisfactory levels of academic performance. These additional interventions include as follows: guidance counseling, speech and language, occupational and physical therapy, SETSS, after-school, extended day and Wilson Programs. Professional development in and outside the school includes the ESL teacher to focus on teacher planning of academic and linguistic objectives in all subject areas. Instructional planning of native language arts is designed to stregthen the basic listening, speaking, writing, and reading skills in alignment with native language arts standards. There is also ongoing articulation between classroom and ESL teacher to effectively support ELL students in achieving English language proficiency so they can attain the same standards established for all students across the grades. This communication plan helps to inform ESL instruction for each grade level aligned with the Common Core Curriculum. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ESL teacher ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to the proficiency levels of our ELLs. The schedule of our ESL students is provided to our principal who approves it. In compliance with CR Part 154, ELL students who are beginner or intermediate levels receive 360 minutes a week of ESL services and those that are at the advanced level receive 180 minutes a week. The program serves all students with limited English proficiency (ELL) until they achieve proficiency in the English language. ELL students receive ESL services by their ESL certified teacher through collaborative planning for small group ESL instruction, through a Push-in/ Pull out Model. In addition, ELL students in grades K-5 participate in our Extended Day, and After-School programs. The content area subjects of the Common Core Curriculum for all students includes as follows: Literacy, Ready-Gen, Go-Math, 0  science, social studies, health, technology, physical education, art, and music. P.S. 25 ESL program is taught 100% of the time in english. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All English language learners receive the same academic content as those who are native English speakers. To ensure our students’ academic progress in the ESL programs, we utilize collaborative common core curriculum planning between ELA, Math and other content area classroom teachers, clusters, and ESL support service teachers. This means that beyond explicit ESL collaboration between teachers also taken into consideration are the language needs of the ELLs. For example, content area teachers monitor the understanding of linguistically challenging material and use a variety of phrasing and synonyms along with visual aids to clarify meaning. Also math teachers devote extra class time to untangling difficult word problems. Social Studies teachers scaffold their instruction with visual aids such as maps, atlas and illustrations to increase comprehension. Our computer lab and Promethean white boards are also used to address the ELLs learning styles. To maximize the English language acquisition for ELL students, the ESL teacher utilizes ESL instructional strategies to deliver content area and/ or small group instruction. Scaffolding is an essential part of the instructional delivery for ELLs. ESL strategies include but are not limited to: TPR, songs and chants, repetition, graphic organizers (i.e. charts, flowcharts, tables, story maps and graphs), modeling, interactive read aloud, retelling, sequencing, thematic units, language experience approach and academic accountable talk. Both the Balanced Literacy Model and Go-Math curriculum support differentiated instruction in targeting our ELL students. Students participate in shared, guided and independent reading instruction and many opportunities for active meaningful engagement. Our performance data on ELA shows that our ELL population needs to work on their academic language skills along with test taking strategies. Therefore, teachers of ELLs will be focusing on academic vocabulary development, and reading comprehension and writing skills during classroom instruction. The performance on standardized tests also informs future planning for teacher of ELLs. In addition, teachers will be assisting students during work periods, conferencing with students in and out of class, doing informal assessments, and running records. Additionally, teacher does small group sessions during, before and after school that focus on literacy and academic language prior to all state assessments. Technology is also used to promote ELL achievement and progress. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? When a new student is registered in our school the parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey to identify the child’s home language. If the child is identified as an eligible candidate for ESL services he/she is administered the LAB-R. Further, if the child’s home language is Spanish and the child does not score above the cut off score, then he/she is administered the NYS Spanish Lab. Additionally, ELL students in grades 3-5 take the NYS Math and Science Assessments once enrolled in NYCDOE public schools. These students are entitled to use glossaries, test translations or a translator, if the test translation is not available. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The English language learner (ELL) population consists of many subgroups, and they all require differentiated instruction: a)Plan for SIFE: The SIFE population in our school is supported with the resources as follows: • Academic intervention services as an extension of the regular ESL school program. • Individualized student needs assessment. • Differentiation of instruction in all areas. • Grade appropriate instructional support materials. 1  • Ongoing communication with parents to monitor their children’s progress. Once SIFE students are identified, P.S. 25 monitors their English language development and scores on the NYSESLAT, ELA and Math assessments. Our school provides support in al content areas to differentiate instruction for literacy needs. P.S. 25 provide all existing support structures such as ESL, Extended Day and Speech to SIFE students as needed. b) Plan for Newcomers: When a new student is registered in our school, we facilitate the transition with the resources as follows: • A “buddy system” in which we identify a similar student in his/ her class who will assist during the day. For example: a student who speaks the same language to help him/ her in the classroom. • A formal parent orientation and an informal student orientation. Informal assessments are used to identify possible intervention programs. • Home and school communication in the native language is an important factor for our newcomers. The newcomers who have been in US schools for less than three years are provided all available support services and differentiation of instruction in all areas as needed. Students who arrive in 3rd grade or later are required to take the NYS Math assessment, however, students take the NYS ELA test after one year. In addition to ESL support services, ELL students are required to participate in our Extended Day program. We provide all newcomers adequate support while preparing them to take the NYS Math and Science assessments. Word to word dictionaries and glossaries are provided to support them on the Math and Science city and state assessments and translated versions of the test can be used as available. Otherwise, we provide a translator when the test has not been translated in students’ native language. Students may also work in small groups with their classroom teachers to target specific areas of need, especially, for test taking skills practice. c) Plan for ELLs receiving ESL support services 4 to 6 years. An extension of services is requested for ELL students between 4-6 years and Long-Term ELLs. Same support as above are provided. d) Plan for Long Term ELLs: In elementary schools we have fewer long term ELLs than across the grades up to high school. An analysis of their scores on the NYSESLAT, ELA and Math assessments suggest that their problem is on reading and writing. Our action plan for this group involves: • Monitoring that students’ progress in all content areas to differentiate instruction and accelerate their English language development and cognitive/academic skills. • Ongoing communication with parents to monitor their children’s progress. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs follow the core curriculum as required for all students in the school. P.S. 25’s literacy and math instruction is provided through the research-based Treasures English language arts program and Everyday Mathematics. We differentiate instruction based on the students’ language and academic profiles. For example: Both curriculums, Everyday Math and Treasures, provide strategies to differentiate instruction including a variety of academic learning activities that enhance the students’ ability to learn the content. We also address the students’ different learning styles and English language modalities through the use of our Rosetta Stone on line Program, computer lab, and Promethean white boards to meet the multisensory (i.e. visual, auditory and kinesthetic) needs. In addition, Skills Tutor and Destination Reading/ Math technology based online programs help to enhance the students’ linguistic, cognitive and academic skills. The school does periodic student progress monitoring through formative and summative assessments including RTI’s AimsWeb to identify and provide instructional support and/ or intervention services that students may need to accelerate English language development and academic performance. Targeted interventions for ELL-SWDs in Math, ELA and other areas include as follows: SETTS, ESL, Extended Day, Literacy and Math after-school and Saturday program, Wilson, Occupational and Physical therapy, Speech and language and Guidance counseling. P.S. 25 provide ESL services as per CR Part 154 to its special education students. ESL program under the guidance of the AP-DR Wilson. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? PS 25’s policy for • Collaboration between the classroom and ESL teacher, school psychologist, social worker, child study team and service providers. 2  • Monitoring newcomers and/ or SIFE students for possible special needs status. • Ensure that teachers of students with IEPs are familiar with the students with IEPs are familiar with the students’ specific needs and that all services are provided as per IEP mandates. • Ongoing communication with parents to monitor their children’s progress. Support for ELL X-coded students and assist teachers through articulation. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention programs for all ELLS at P.S. 25 in Math, ELA and other areas are as follows: SETSS, ESL, Extended Day, Literacy, Math, After-School, Wilson, Occupational and Physical Therapy, also Speech and Language, and Guidance counseling. The language of instruction is English. Our bilingual paras are assigned to work with ELL students with IEPs so they can serve as translators. We conduct IEP evaluations and parents meetings in English, Spanish and any other language for our students with special needs. Both the ESL program and classroom teachers provide interventions in the classroom. All teachers monitor students’ understanding of the content material and differentiate the instruction to develop the students’ English language proficiency in the four modalities: listening, reading, writing, and speaking. For example: They guide students to read, write, listen, ask questions, think and use the academic language to express themselves and scaffold their learning. Briefly, they engage students in a variety of meaningful respectful tasks that are designed according to the students’ needs and preferences. Literacy and math instructions are provided through ESL methodology in alignment with NYS Learning Standards for English language learners and the NYC/NYS Common Core Curriculum. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Several new software programs are available for all ELLs. These include: GO-Math, Ready Gen, Wilson Reading, Rosetta Stone, language program and others. We also address the students’ learning styles and accelerate English language development through the use of Promethean white boards and computer lab. These technology based resources support differentiated instruction and enhance ELLs’ cognitive skills, linguistic and academic growth. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None of the services and programs will be discontinued next year. They all worked well this year so we will continue them until there is a need to change any. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs have equal access to the school programs and supplemental services offered in our building. These include: ESL, SETSS, Wilson program, guidance counselor, family worker, parent coordinator, occupational and physical therapy, speech and language therapist, social worker, psychologist, Extented Day, Literacy, and Math Afer-School, Saturday School, Family Literacy, Music Mentrs and technology related skills and language development programs. We provide additional after-school programs on NYS ELA and Math test preparationfor ELL students in grades 3, 4 and 5. Additionally, we implement several after-school state support services (i.e. Liberty Learning, and READ). In order to support learning and foster community involvement, we are looking for community business sponsers to help defrey the cost of some things that are planned for ELL parents and their families. Parents of ELL students could come to the school throughout the year to take part in community celebrations, school-wide events, and parent workshops. These events include: book sales, Hispanic Heritage Celebration, African American History Month, 100 Days of School, holiday assemblies/ celebrations and graduation ceremonies, among others. Also, school organizes many school trips in which parents often participate. Translation and interpretation services are offered to increase the involvement of parents in the school community. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The Balanced Literacy Model is used to support differentiated instruction in targeting our ELL students. The students participate in read aloud, independent reading, shared and guided instruction and min-lessons. We implement the research-3  based Treasures English language arts program. ELL students use leveled libraries according to their linguistic and academic profiles. In addition, we implement GO-Math, and Ready-Gen the curriculum mandated by the New York City Department of Education which also provides strategies to differentiate math and ELA instructions. We enhance ESL instruction through computer software and online programs that include: Renzulli, Skills Tutor, Destination, Math/ Reading and Rosetta Stone program. Students use these programs to improve their vocabulary, phonics comprehension skills in English. On the other hand, Promethean white boards support the multisensory needs of ELLs, especially, ELLs with disabilities. Picture dictionaries and bilingual glossaries/ dictionaries are used frequently in the ESL instruction. Additional materials used to familiarize ELL students with the state assessments include: Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT, KAPLAN, New York State Coach in ELA and Go-Math. Technology is also used to accelerate ELL students’ English language development. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? At P.S. 25 there is native language support in the ESL classes. Students are allowed to use their native language with the teacher and/ or peers to express understanding or ask for clarification. Books in the different languages, Webster Dictionaries, picture dictionaries and bilingual dictionaries/ glossaries are available to support instruction. As a testing accommodation, translated editions of some tests and bilingual glossaries are provided when taking State content area examinations. We help students develop their vocabulary skills so they could move quickly in Reading. We use assessments as standardize exams, teacher made test, portfolios, conferencing project and technology based reports. These assessments are aligned with state content language program goals as well as grade-level academic expectations and cross-cultural competence. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The required services support resources correspond to ELL’s ages and grade levels. ELL students acquire and develop English language skills while meeting their grade and age level standards in literacy and the content areas. ELL students’ periodic progress monitoring through formative and summative assessments is used to drive ESL instruction in the four English language modalities: speaking, listening, reading and writing. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The Balanced Literacy Model is used to support differentiated instruction in targeting our ELL students. The students participate in read aloud, independent reading, shared and guided instruction and min-lessons. We implement the research-based Treasures English language arts program. ELL students use leveled libraries according to their linguistic and academic profiles. In addition, we implement GO-Math, and Ready-Gen the curriculum mandated by the New York City Department of Education which also provides strategies to differentiate math and ELA instructions. We enhance ESL instruction through computer software and online programs that include: Renzulli, Skills Tutor, Destination, Math/ Reading and Rosetta Stone program. Students use these programs to improve their vocabulary, phonics comprehension skills in English. On the other hand, Promethean white boards support the multisensory needs of ELLs, especially, ELLs with disabilities. Picture dictionaries and bilingual glossaries/ dictionaries are used frequently in the ESL instruction. Additional materials used to familiarize ELL students with the state assessments include: Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT, KAPLAN, New York State Coach in ELA and Go-Math. Technology is also used to accelerate ELL students’ English language development. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We conduct parent orientation as soon as students are enrolled, identified and entitled to receive ESL instructional services. There are also meetings with the parent coordinator, and the school’s secretary. They help conduct oral interviews with parents, gather documentation upon registration and discuss the child’s placement. All meetings are translated for parents in Spanish and other languages when a translator is available. All parents are invited to parent-Teacher Conferences/ Open School Nights in the Fall and Spring semesters to meet staff members to discuss student performance. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 4  Students are permitted to use their native language with each other and bilingual dictionaries/ glossaries can be used in the classrooms as well. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 0 Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Paste response to question here: Paste response to question here: 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Paste response to question here: Paste response to question here: Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? As required under Part 154, parents of newly enrolled ELLs are also invited in the Fall and Spring semesters to Parent-Teacher Conferences to discuss student performance. Information shared with parents of ELLs include: The Language Allocation Policy; the NYSESLAT, ELA, Math, and the Science state tests; testing exemptions, modifications and accommodations for ELLs; and the grade promotional policy. All meetings are translated for parents in Spanish and other languages when a translator is available. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent involvement in our school is a key component of our yearly planning. School orientation is provided for parents of newly registered ELLs by the Parent Coordinator and the ESL teacher to provide them with information about ESL program at P. S. 25. Parents are informed of program descriptions, instructional requirements, and school program choices through an orientation video, parent guides and other literature in the parents’ home languages 5  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Anita Coley, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Eubie Blake School DBN: PS025 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Anita Coley Title Principal Dr. Esther Wilson Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Darcy Griffin Parent Walker Wilson Teacher/Subject Area Sharon Green Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Angela Sierra School Counselor Rahesha Amon Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 12/17/15 12/17/15 12/17/15 12/17/15 12/17/15 12/17/51 12/17/15 8  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 16K025 School Name: The Eubie Blake School Superintendent: Evelyn Santiago The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. To ensure that all parents are provided with appropriate and timely information in a language they can understand, several steps are taken. First parents fill out the Home Language Identification Survey. In this survey parents state what language (s) is (are) spoken at home. The data gathered from these surveys is then entered on ATS. When parents are sent written information, they receive it in English and the information is translated into their native language. In order to provide parents with any information related to their children's educational options and achievements, communication is done by both oral and written interpretations. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 9 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Parents' preferred languages include Spanish, Arabic, French, and Bengali. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. PS 25 typically disseminates flyers advertising upcoming school events such as assemblies (distributed monthly), Health Fair (May), STEM Fair (February), and Multicultural Day (May). Letters are distributed notifying parents of parent-teacher conferences (November, March and May, half-a-days (November and March), special programs that are offered such as after-school programs (September), upcoming school closings (the week before each holiday occurs), and New York State testing dates (Fall and Spring). Newsletters and progress reports are sent to parents on a monthly basis. Report cards are issued in November and March. 0  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? There are parent-teacher conferences scheduled for November 4, November 5, March 2, March 3, and May 12 th . Curriculum Teas are held for all parents on the third Tuesday of each month. Workshops for parents (Tuedays) 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In order to fulfill the requirements for translation and interpretation services, our school welcomes parent visitors and provides information in the covered languages from the Department's website and the African Services Committee and explains how to access these services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 1  Feedback is gathered from parents through formal interviews, also informally through ongoing communication with parents during conferences, workshops, school events, and PTA meetings. The New York City annual school survey also provides us with important feedback from our parents. 2 
