 23K041 School Name: P.S. 041 FRANCIS WHITE Principal: SHONELLE HALL   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 23K041 PS/IS 41 332300010041 K-8 411 Thatford Ave Brooklyn, NY 11212 929-305-3561 Fax: shall26@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: 718-495-7732 Phone Number: School Contact Person: S. Hall Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: S. Hall S. Hill D. Vargas R. Carson S. Grant N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 23 Dr.Miatheresa Pate Superintendent: 1784 Park Place Brooklyn, NY 11212 Superintendent’s Office Address: mpate@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 7183460816 Phone Number: 718-385-3768 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston St. bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: 718-935-3954 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Shonelle Hall Sonja Hill Delia Vargas S. Grant ManjeetKaur Rhonticia Carson Jennifer Mowbray *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) DoretheaRedd JermaineShannon Victoria Nelson M. Landais Mary Brent E.Montalvo Jacqueline Sanchez Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Teacher Member/ DC37 Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of the PS/IS 41 school community is to create a safe, positive, organized learning environment for all children. We will strive to build a community in which all members share a commitment to respect, responsibility and the use of reason. With the support and involvement of parents and community members, we will work to meet the academic, social and emotional needs of all students. We will nurture, educate and empower our students, so that they are able to think critically, solve problems and make positive choices that will prepare them for college and careers.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS/IS 41 is a K-8 school with a current population of 475 students. PS/IS 41 is currently sharing space with FirstStepNYC, a birth through 4 early learning center. In order to support this mission, PS/IS 41 has partnered with SCO Family of Services to provide after school programs for students in grades K-8. The K-5 program is funded through a grant, as is the middle school program. As part of both of these grants, the school provides The in-kind support through the employment of school staff to provide ELA and Math instruction 2 days a week. The middle school grant also provides for an educational liaison to support instructional coherence with the school day ELA and Math programs. In addition to the grant/partnerships with SCO, PS/IS 41 will partner with Victory Music and Dance, which will provide music and dance instruction. Second grade students will continue to participate in the Swim for Life program sponsored by the Brownsville Recreation Center. Middle School teachers are also part of the Urban Advantage Science program and as such enjoy a range of materials and experiences that can be shared with our middle school students. P.S/I.S 41 will continue to participate in the Learning Gardens program. The grades participating will be determined during the 2017-2018 school year. The school hopes to participate in the CHAMPS/BOKS Fitness program, as well as continuing our partnership with the Boys Scouts of America during the 2018-2019 school year. The school will also establish partnerships with Life Changing Music, Arts Empowerment Group and NY Chess and Games to build students artistic lens as well as their critical thinking skills. P.S./I.S. 41 will be in the third year of the Apple CONNECTED grant which provides one to one digital devices for all student In addition, PS/IS 41 has begun work with the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, to support students, staff and parents in their awareness of mental health issues, avenues of support and neighborhood resources. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special needs students make up a significant percentage of the total school population. This group can be divided between those students in self-contained classes, Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classes and those students receiving support services through Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS) teachers. A small percentage receive related services only, including OT, PT and speech. Students receiving academic special education services are classified as learning disabled, emotionally disabled, language impaired and other health impaired. These students struggle to meet grade level expectations, with many performing two or more years below grade level. English language learners make up a small, yet increasing, percentage of the overall school population but demonstrate the need for ongoing support. Many of these students come to PS/IS 41 with little or no English as first time entrants into the N.Y.C school system. These students are often entering the school in grades 4-8, with limited literacy skills in their native language. During the 2017-2018 school year, PS/IS 41 will receive Title III funds to support English Language Learners. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. School surveys, as reported in the School Quality Report 2016 and the Quality Review (2016/2017) indicate areas of success as well as areas in need of continued focus. Areas of strength include high expectations, collaborative professional relationships and principal instructional leadership. Areas for continued growth are rigorous instruction, supportive environment, and family community ties.Within the area of collaborative teachers, Innovation and collective responsibility are areas for growth. The school as a whole improved in the areas of Supportive Environment and Family and Community Ties Student assessment data for 2016 demonstrates the need for continued growth in 0  both ELA and Math, with a particular need to improve outcomes for students with individualized Education Plans (IEP’s). 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 23K041 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 457 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 63 62 21 9 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 43 43 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 98.0% % Attendance Rate 96.3% % Reduced Lunch 7.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.0% 31.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.13 0% 2% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 19.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 68% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 56 55 86.1% 1.8% 32.6% 60.0% 0.4% 5.0% 4 21% 9 16.8% 33% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Rigorous instruction areas for improvement are student discussion and effective teaching. Student discussion was an area of weakness on the Framework for Great Schools Report (2016) The Quality Review indicator 1.2, Pedagogy, was scored as developing (2015.) This indicates that teachers require additional support in utilizing a common core aligned curriculum, addressing the instructional shifts and engaging students in higher order questioning and rigorous tasks. as well as Student assessment data in ELA and Math also indicates the need for an improvement in instruction, An analysis of Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) (2016) assessment data indicates growth for the majority of students and ELA and Math, and in the middle school growth in Social Studies and Science. However this growth does not indicate student proficiency in these subjects. Advance data (2016) indicates the need for teacher growth in student engagement and assessment. No teachers were determined to be highly effective. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. With a cycle of targeted assessments and authentic feedback from teachers and peers, students will make improvements to daily tasks in real time and consistently meet learning objectives. For SWDs and ELLs we will use Specially Designed Instruction (SDI), by adapting the content, methodology, and delivery of instruction to address all learners based on their entry points. By June 2019, this will result in proficiency gains of 5% on NYS ELA and Math Assessments for all students including, SWDs and ELLs. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Revised literacy instruction to include citywide core curriculum programs in K-5 (Ready Gen) with the addition of Fundations in grades K-3, guided reading in grades K-5 and a scripted writing program in grades K-8. Standards based skill/strategy calendars will be developed for each grade, CCLS derived "I can " statements will be used to formulate objectives. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom K-5 9/18-6/19 Administration, Classroom teachers, Universal Literacy coach Incorporate science and social studies grade level content into literacy instruction through instructional supports such as professional development and curriculum planning. The inclusion of non- fiction leveled texts for guided reading. Classroom K-5 10/18-6/19 Classroom teachers, Professional development team Increase instructional supports with online interactive programs such as MyOn, that are aligned with the CCLS to provide individualized student instruction using one-to-one devices. All students 10/18-6/19 Administration, classroom teachers Grades 3-5 scheduled to use MyON in media center 2x a week. Sumdog to support Math fluency School Professional Learning Plan will focus on teacher professional development in modeling (explicit instruction), guided practice and independent practice strategies and in questioning and discussion and student engagement. all teachers 10/18-6/19 Administration, classroom teachersacher Implementation of SUMDOG-online Math fluency program all teachers 9/18-6/19 classroom teachers After school program open to all students ELL after school program for targeted students identified students identified ELL students 9/18-06/19 Assistant Principals 10/18-6/19 ESL teacher 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops to support understanding of grade level expectations and CCLS . 11/18-5/19 Classroom teachers, parent engagement team, Parent Coordinator 4  Parent workshops for use of technology/online programs to provide at home support-10/18-Technology teacher, Apple Support staff Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. This annual goal will be leveraged through the professional development provided by school staff, professional learning opportunities provided by the Borough Field Service Center (BFSC). In addition, tax levy funds will be used to purchase on line programs such as MyOn reader, iReady and Sumdog. Apple ConnectEd grant with devices and professional development will also support the goal. Per session and per diem funds will be set aside to support professional development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A mid-year review of class assessment data (including running records, writing on demand, Performance Series on-line will be done in January. Student growth will be assessed by an increase of 2 reading levels on TC (Grades K-3), and a growth of 10% on Performance Series (Grades 4-8). Teacher observation data will be analyzed by administration, from initial observations through second and third to identify and address trends in teacher modeling and implementation of guided reading strategies. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Progress toward the goal will be assessed through Performance Series and TC Assessments.. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Supportive environment is an area of great need for PS/IS 41. The overall score was 2.72 on the Framework for Great Schools report (2016) with a positive response rate of only 64%. Areas of strength include next level guidance (93% positive) and press towards academic achievement (75% positive) , as identified in the Framework for Great Schools Report of 2016. According to the Quality Review (2015), high expectations was an area of celebration. Areas of need are classroom behavior, with only a 44% positive response rate, and peer support for academic work with only a 60% positive response rate. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the supportive environment score on the School Quality Guide will make a 5% increase from 75% to 80%. This increase would be primarily reflected in the social-emotional and bully-prevention indicators. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Implementation of school wide Positive Behavioral Intervention and Supports (PBIS) program (digital point system) beginning in September. Student identified rewards based on student survey. Professional development for teachers on peer support within the classroom, individual support for students and addressing the specific needs of middle school students Professional learning for all teachers around complex Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) and depression in young children Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students 9/18-6/19 Dean All teachers 10/18 All teachers 11/18 PD team, guidance counselor, social worker Administration, guidance counselor, social worker, Single Shepherd Adopt a Child program in ELA and Math for one to one academic and social/emotional support All teachers 10/18-5/19, PD team weekly Visiting teacher program to support across grade connections between teachers and students. All teachers 11/18-5/19, Assistant Principals biweekly Monthly data review meetings for all incidents with Borough Safety Director Dean 11/18-6/19 Dean Modified PBIS for Middle School that more closely addresses targeted behaviors and reward using class DOJO Middle school 9/18-6/19 AP, middle school teachers Implementation of the Single Shepherd program for middle school students CBO alignment with Office of School Health(OSHMH) support for students-assemblies and ongoing support. Identified students Middle School students 19/18-6/19 DOE 9/18, 12/18-6/19 CBO, OSHMH,PC Protocols used to routinize student behavior in all classrooms All classes 9/18-10/19 All teachers Use of school culture rubric to evaluate implementation of protocols All classes monthly Dean 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 7  Parent workshops to support understanding of the Supportive Environment area of the Framework for Great Schools and key areas for at home support-11/18-School Psychologist.Social Worker Monthly Family events planned for parents and students-Monthly-Parent Engagement Team Student/Parent Assembly -bullying and other mental health issues-9/18-OSHMH and CBO Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Implementation of this goal will be leveraged through the use of Title I funds to support the implementation of PBIS and to purchase the professional development books. Middle school schedules will be developed that provide for advisory groups once a week. After school programs funded by DYCD/OCFNS grants and in kind support through Title 1 funds, including teacher and supervisor per session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Midyear survey to evaluate classroom behavior. February 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Staff survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our 2016-17 (most recent) Quality Review indicated that " "Teacher-led analysis of student data results in improvements to individual teacher practices and progress for groups of students but has yet to yield shared improvements in teacher practice or mastery for groups of students. Teacher leaders have a voice in curriculum development and adjustments but have yet to play an integral role in schoolwide decisions that affect student learning across the school." In addition, the QR states that "Leadership has identified model teachers, grade and content team leaders in efforts to establish distributed leadership structures. Teacher teams consistently analyze data from New York State and benchmark assessments and student work samples, but have yet to systematically analyze teacher work." 2015-16 NYS Common Core Mathematics Exam results indicate a small year-over-year gain in the percentage of students scoring at or above proficiency (Level 3), yet still lag behind 2014 results (see below): 2014: 14.3% 2015: 8.0% 2016: 8.6% A clear need exists for teams of teachers to continue to deeply analyze the June instructional report to determine areas of common need in Math, and tailor instruction to address students' needs appropriately. In addition, teacher team work must focus on the inquiry model, utilize effective protocols to analyze student work in real time in order to adjust day to day classroom instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 9  By June 2019, teacher teams will work to streamline instruction to address student misconceptions in Mathematics, resulting in a 3% gain in students scoring at levels 3 & 4 on the NYS Common Core Math Exam. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Continue to include small group instruction, guided practice, and independent practice in the lesson plan format for Math instruction in Grades K-5 All K-5 students Teacher teams will work under the guidance of the Assistant Principals/Professional Development team to implement protocols used during grade meetings. They will analyze student work and assessment data to modify curriculum, instruction and assessment tasks. They will specifically focus on student misconceptions and collaboratively develop strategies to address these misconceptions. Classroom Teachers Principal & APs Principal & APs September 2018-June 2019 October 2018-May 2019 Teacher teams will utilize Google docs to manage grade level team work, record classroom teachers Sept. 2018-June. 2019 Teachers Teacher teams will utilize protocols in student work analysis grade teams Oct. 17-6/18 Teachers K-5 (grade level) teams, and 6-8 (cross curricular) teams are programmed for weekly meeting time to facilitate this work. Teacher Teams English Language Learners will be provided with Math texts in their native language (as needed and available). ELLs Teacher teams will also analyze the June Instructional Reports, mining the data to determine the key standards that students frequently did not master, and unpacking those standards. Teacher Teams Assistant Principals Principal & APs Model Teacher October 2017-May 2018 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Sept. 2018-October 2019 All Students October Principal & APs As a result of data analysis, curriculum maps will be revised, and instruction will be tailored to best meets students' academic needs. Inter class/grade visitations will give teachers the opportunity to see the previous or following grade's standards being taught, as well as provide an opportunity to see best practices in action. Teachers Middle School Students will be encouraged to continue to engage in self and peer assessment through the use of rubrics; this process will be spread to the elementary school grades as well. Students School leaders will attend each grade's meeting at least once a month to provide additional support to teacher teams. Teacher Teams 2017-June 2018 October 2018-May 2019 September 2018-June 2019 October 2018-May 2019 Principal & APs Teachers Principal & APs 1 School leaders will monitor the work of teacher teams by analyzing Google Docs: notes, minutes, sign in sheets, and agendas from meetings Universal Literacy Coach will support teacher collaboration in grades K-2 through group PD , inter visitation and peer feedback. Teacher Teams October 2018-June 2019 K-2 Teachers October 2018-June 2019 Principal & APs Universal Literacy coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In grades K-5, once per quarter, during Tuesday's parent engagement time, parents will be invited to participate in grade team meetings. This will support their understanding of how teachers use data to modify instruction and target individual student needs. Evening workshops will be held to provide parents with ideas and resources to support them in their work with their child at home. Parents as Partners is an initiative to educate parents on the common core standards being currently taught, and provide the parents with tools and strategies they can use at home to assist their students with mastery of the standards. This program target middle school parents. The workshop is held every 6 weeks. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Diem coverage for PD, Contractual PD Time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, Performance Series assessments in Math will indicate a 2% increase in students scoring at Levels 3 & 4 in Mathematics. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Performance Series assessments in Math iReady in ELA and Math 2  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the NYC School Survey for 2017-18, ____% of teachers responded positively to the statement "The principal and APs function as a cohesive unit." While this does indicate a majority, the school leaders have identified this as an area in which they would like to improve moving forward. The Framework for Great Schools Report indicates that 71% of the staff responded positively to questions regarding Teacher Influence. Administration and the School Leadership Team have identified this as an additional area for growth. The NYC School Survey indicates that 70% of teachers responded positively to questions about school leaders participating in instructional planning. Again, while this indicates that a majority of respondents feel that school leaders do participate in instructional planning, the fact that nearly one third disagree shows that improvement can be made. This will be the priority need for the 2017-18 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will take a more active role in instructional planning throughout the school, as measured by an increase from 3.21 to 3.4 on the Effective School Leadership section of the School Quality Guide. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Principal and APs will conduct weekly walkthroughs together to ensure a clear vision of what good instruction looks like throughout the school. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers October Principal 2018-June 2019 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal & APs School-wide teams (Professional Development, Parental Engagement, School Environment, etc.) will meet on a monthly basis. All staff The Professional Development Team will conduct a schoolwide survey of teachers to determine their PD needs and preferences. All Teachers October PD Team 2018 Common Planning Time is embedded in all teachers' schedules; K-5 teachers meet in grade teams, and middle school teachers meet in cross-content teams. All Classroom Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal & APs One Drive calendars and documents have implemented to quickly and efficiently share information with all stakeholders. All staff A school leader (Principal or AP) will participate in each teacher team meeting on a monthly (or more frequent) basis. Teacher Teams Principal Principal September 2018-June 2019 October 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The School Messenger, Class Dojo, Engrade, and Instagram page will be utilized to keep parents informed about administrative initiatives and provide access to instructional support. Remind phone app will be utilized by teachers and administration to keep parents up to date on school events and assignments. Monthly discussions will be held with administration and parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Field Support Liaison (FSL)from District, Assistant Principals, Google Calendars, Apple Ed Tech Resources 5  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, an internal Google survey will indicate a 3% increase in teachers' positive responses for Effective School Leadership questions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Internal Google Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Family and Community ties is an area in need for the school. Currently there is limited parent involvement, including participation in events, attendance at Student Led Conferences (SLC), contact with teachers and support for students at home. This is evident from a qualitative review of parent participation, a quantitative review of attendance sheets from SLC nights, family nights and Parent Association meetings as well as teacher feedback. For most school events, it is a predictable group of parents that volunteer and/or participate. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we aim to increase parent participation by 10%, as measured by attendance of parents and families at monthly family nights, parent teacher conferences and other school wide events. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parent workshops during the October and May conferences with a series of connected workshops throughout the school year-Partnering for Success. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All parents 10/18-6/19 PD Team Parent Engagement Team. Parent Coordinator Career Day/Dress for Success during which members of the school and local community will be invited in to share their stories with students and with parents. All students and families 5/19 Career Day committee Monthly Family Nights Apple ConnectEd ReLaunch Event All families 9/18-6/19 Administration All students and Families 9/21/18 Implementation team Add one Saturday event related to each Monthly family events (e.g. Holiday Craft Night/Gingerbread House Making) All students and families 12/19-6/19 Parent Engagement Team Our CBO afterschool partner, SCO Family Dynamics will host several showcases for families, highlighting their children's achievements. Monthly Parent Coordinator All students and families in the afterschool program SchoolMessenger used for family notifications All students ongoing Administration Engrade used for electronic communication with students and parents Partnership with OSHMH to support parents in the area Mental Health through presentations and workshops Use of Classroom Dojo in grades K-5 to support ongoing communication with parents Classroom teachers All parents K-5 parents ongoing Classroom teachers 9/18 and ongoing 10/18-ongoing PC, mental health consultant, CBO Classroom Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. SCO Family of Services 8  Department of Health and Mental Hygiene Boy Scouts of America Office of School Health and Mental Hygiene Arts Empowerment Group Life Changing Music Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The implementation of the action plan will be leveraged through the use of the parent engagement time, parent engagement team, use of Title I parent involvement funds and teacher experts. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-year analysis of parent attendance sheets at all events to determine percentage increase in parent attendance of 10%. Parent Feedback forms. Staff feedback. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Increase in parent participation as evidenced by sign in sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Level 1 & 2 Mathematics Level 1 & 2 Science Level 1 & 2 Social Studies Level 1 & 2 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) At risk behavior that impedes learning, SAVE room removals Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Guided Reading, Fundations, Rewards Reading, myON, iReady Online math support: SumDog& Waggle, small group instruction, iReady Instructional level text, myON(content area texts) Instructional level text, myON(content area texts) Counseling Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, online reading support, one on one During the school day Small group, online reading support, one on one During the school day Individual and small group During the school day Individual and small group During the school day Small group and one-to one During the day 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 57 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. School supplies, uniforms, book bags, school social worker/STH coordinator for social-emotional supports. Access to resources provide through the Department of School Health and Mental Hygiene Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Currently, 99% of teachers are considered highly qualified based on the BEDS survey. There is little staff turnover, with the majority of the teachers having been at the school for more than 7 years. There has been no recruitment during the past several years except in the areas of music and dance. In looking to staff these positions, the school worked with the Middle School Arts Matters office to obtain highly qualified teachers. Majority of the staff is retained each year and effort is made to support teachers through weekly professional development provided at the school as well as teacher participation in professional development provided by the Field Support Office. Teachers also participate in area specific professional development, such as ENL professional development, dance professional development and Special Education professional development. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). PS/IS 41 has a professional development team responsible for organizing and implementing professional development throughout the year. This team consists of teachers from a range of grades and is led by Emergent Teacher leaders. A survey is administered in the fall to identify teacher specified areas of need. An administrative meeting is held to review assessment and Advance data and develop a plan that incorporates the teacher identified PD with school wide needs. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 3  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Kindergarten teachers at PS/IS 41 work closely with FirstStepNYC in developing transition plans and events. The transition team meets several times during the year. Pre-K students at FirstStepNYC participate in events with the kindergarten students from 41, including holiday celebrations, read-alouds, author visits etc. The teachers also provide opportunities for local pre-k students to visit their classrooms and learn about the school and about kindergarten. FirstStep pre-k has the opportunity to share lunch in the cafeteria as well. These activities will continue and be expanded upon next year, with opportunities for extended classroom visits, shared play experiences and cooperative gardening activities. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are included in the decision making process through the MOSL and the professional development team. The PD team will provide support to classroom teachers on the use of inquiry based protocols for looking at student work and making instructional adjustments. In addition, grade team professional development will be provided to support teachers in the use of baseline, state and classroom assessment data to group students and provide targeted instruction to individual and small groups of students. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. 4  school allocation amounts) Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local 436,450 80,674 12,366 0 3,106,929 X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e, Section 5a, Section 5a, 5c Section 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 5  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS/IS 41K, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS/IS 41 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 7  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 8  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/IS 41, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 9  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting student-led conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 0  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 1  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 2  ● always try my best to learn. 3  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: ELL students will be targeted for participation in the general after school program that runs Monday through Friday from 2:30-5:00. Within this program, ELA and Math instruction for ESL students will take place on two days a week for 2 hours per day. ( Monday 3:40-5:00 and Tuesday 3:40-5:00)for a total of 2 hours 40 minutes per week for 18 weeks) The language of instruction for this program is English. Home language supports will include glossaries, native language dictionaries and on-line translation materials. ELL students will be grouped as closely as possible. Certified ESL teacher (Sharon Peritz) will teach a small group of ELL students twice a week for a total of three hours in English. The ESL teacher will work with entering and emergent on one day and transitioning and commanding on the other. A co teacher for Math will work with the ESL Teacher both days to provide additional instructional support, both paid by the Title III funds. The program will begin on Monday February 13, 2017 and end on June 20, 2017, Materials will include digital books through MYON reader, digital math support through SUMDOG and additional on line ESL programs (Edmentum). The online support programs are designed to support ENL students with a variety of scaffolds, including videos, pictures. These online programs will be used to support the direct instruction provided by the teacher. In addition, student progress in MYON and Sumdog will be monitored, tracked and shared with the classroom teacher. Students served will include students from grades 2-8. They will be from all subgroups. Based on data from the 2016 NYSESLAT exam, this group will be made up of 8 expanding students, 10 transitioning students, 5 emerging students and 5 entering students. Student modality data as well as NYS math data was also used when grouping students. Supervisory support will be included for the hours for the program at per session rate for 2 hours, 40 minutes per week for 18 weeks. Supervisor needed for the program as there is no supervisor in the building. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: ENL Instruction in the Integrated Classroom: 10/29/16 3. Colorin Colorado: 10/29/16 4. 5. Formative Assessment: Using technology to assess students in order to drive instruction: 12/1/16 5  Part C: Professional Development 6. Plickers Tutorial: 12/8/16 7. Math Talk Moves that Count: 12/15/16 8. Co-Teaching with Prof. Andrea Honigsfeld: 1/30/17 3. Colorin Colorado: 10/29/16 4. ENL Instruction in the Integrated Classroom: 10/29/16 5. Formative Assessment: Using technology to assess students in order to drive instruction: 12/1/16 6. Plickers Tutorial: 12/8/16 7. Math Talk Moves that Count: 12/15/16 8. Co-Teaching with Prof. Andrea Honigsfeld: 1/30/17 Certified ESL teacher will provide professional development to teachers on school- based Monday afternoons, when the Title III program will not be in session. Topics will include language development strategies, ESL instructional strategies and strategies to support content language development that will support students in their content area classes. In addition, The ESL teacher will engage in a study group with early childhood teachers of ENL students. The book used will be One Child, Two Languages. Session Topics will include Individual Differences in Second Language Learning, Information, Communication and Organization for English Language Learners and Assessment of English Language Learners. This study group will meet 4 times beginning in March. Meetings will be March 7, March 21, April 4, and April 18. The ESL teacher will attend Borough Field Support Office Professional development for teachers of ENL students and other PD's as they arise. She has attended the following workshops: Colorin Colorado-10-29-16, ENL Instruction in the Integrated Classroom 10-29-16, Formative Assessment Using Technology-12-1-16, Math Moves that Count-12-15-16, Co-Teaching-1-20-17. In addition, program based professional development (Edmentum, MYon) will be provided to the ESL teacher through in person training provided by the vendor of these programs. School based professional development records will be maintained in the school professional development binder and the ESL teacher will maintain her documentation for the PD she attends. This will be at no cost. Additional dates of PD not available at this time as the BFSC Spring catalog is not out yet. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Certified ESL teacher will provide monthly parent workshops to support parents of ELL students. These workshops will take place on one Wednesday a month for 45 minutes. School staff (bilingual) will provide translation services at per session rates. Topics will include: 2/15-6 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Developmental stages of reading, 3/22 -Stages of language acquisition, 4/26-Is it a language issue or a Disability (this workshop is designed to help parents understand the difference)? 5/24-How to help at home. 6/21-Maintaining English Learning over the Summer. Parents will be notified in home language in writing and via school message system. The ESL teacher will receive per session pay for these workshops. Dates include 2/15, 3/22, 4/26, 5/24, 6/21 and will take place from 6:00pm until 7:15. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Teacher per session pay for after school n/a Notebooks, chart tablets, markers, pencils Edmentum online programs n/a n/a n/a Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) n/a  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0 0 0 n/a 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 23 School Name PS/IS 41 Borough Brooklyn School Number 041 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal S. Hall Coach none ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Sharon Peritz Teacher/Subject Area Susan Skidmore-Science Teacher/Subject Area R. Carson-Grade 5 Related-Service Provider Gloria Tingue Superintendent Miatheresa Pate Assistant Principal K. Mohan Coach none School Counselor Barbara Lino Parent Delia Vargas Parent Coordinator Velma Gamble Field Support Center Staff Member Barbara Lino Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 471 8 Total number of ELLs 36 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.64%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Early childhood students are assessed with TC assessments. In grades K-2 this is done in the fall and then students are assessed mid-year as well as at the end of the year. ELL students in these grades assess generally at similar levels to the non-ell population, particularly in grades K and 1. Students arriving in the school as non-English speakers make rapid progress in kindergarten and grade 1. For older students the Periodic Assessment for ELL's is used as a literacy assessment tool. The test is given three times a year from 3rd through 8th grade. In terms of the instruction program, much of the general population require vocabulary and other forms of language development. The early childhood program incorporates a variety of listening, speaking , reading and writing activities that benefit all students. For the upcoming school year, the school will be implementing the Fundations program for phonics and phonemic awareness development. Last yea'rs NYSESLAT is looked at for strengths and for need. 12 children grew in strength in speaking, only 3 advanced in listening. three students advanced in reading and 7 students advanced in writing. only 3 students showed need in speaking, 1 needed more instruction in listening, , 2 in reading and 10 students showed a deficit in writing. 9  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In the regular classroom., TC assessments will continue and materials are in place to sup[port the use of these assessments. In addition, teachers in grades K-2 will continue to implement the Fundations phonics program. Additional programs available to support this effort include Brainpop ESL and Edmentum ESL programs for use during ENL instruction. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our ENL program by the yearly NYSESLAT scores as well as individual achievement that are seen in the classroom. . Classroom data will include TC assessments, ELL Periodic Assessment data, Performance series Math and ELA data and NYSITELL information. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Test results are examined to identify areas of deficiency. The above named programs (Brainpop and Edmentum) will provide a broad range of support across the areas of need. In addition, classroom teachers will be able to support continued development through the use of MYON reader and SUMDOG math fluency programs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Classroom data derived from TC assessments, reading assessments etc. are used to identify those students in need of RTI strategies. Baseline assessments are administered to all students and appropriate core subject area instruction is provided. In the classroom, teachers will provide targeted support to students based on guided reading levels. The schools is using a progress monitoring strategy that involves 5 cycles of assessment in the classroom and the ELL periodic assessment three times. Data from this will be used to focus on student learning and provide support to ELL students with a focus on using the "acquisition of language lens" to examine areas of need. Based on the results, students receive scaffolded instruction and intervention strategies which are provided by the Ready Gen curriculum. Additional support will be provided through after school. The students are also grouped differently according to their needs and proficiencies (ie. proficient student with a less proficient student.) All struggling students, regardless of ELL status are discussed in grade level meetings. Students determined to need it are offered at-risk resource room services. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data reveals that students reach proficiency much more quickly in listening and speaking than in writing and reading. The NYSESLAT shows an improving trend. The NYSITELL shows where a particular student will need help and what areas should be addressed. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? These findings will be shared with the administrative cabinet and the professional development team. These groups, along with the ENL teacher will identify needs and modify programs as needed. ENL teacher will put an instructional emphasis on areas where the student's showed a deficiency in. ENL teacher will tailor lesson plans accordingly along with the rest of the applicable teachers. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 0  regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The school offers a stand alone English as a New Language program model as well as an integrated program where the ENL teacher co- teaches in the students' regular classroom. There are forty two students that receive this service. Entering, emerging and transitioning students will receive 360 minutes per week and Expanding students will receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction. Commanding students will receive 90 minutes for two years. Entering and Emerging students will receive 180 minutes of a stand alone ENL class per week and 180 minutes of an integrated class per week. Transitioning students attend an integrated class for 180 minutes per week. These students attend the ESL stand alone class based on flexible scheduling. The Expanding and Commanding students are fully integrated. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Entering, emerging and transitioning level students will receive 360 minutes per week, and expanding level students will receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction and 180 minutes of ELA per week. Commanding students will receive 90 minutes per week. Students are grouped on a two band grade level. Proficiency level materials are being utilized by the ENL teacher. In all classrooms teachers use ENL strategies to teach content areas. ELLs are also supported through using dictionaries and ELLs are allowed to talk to their peers in their native language. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teacher will follow standards-based instruction. The ENL teacher uses TPR (Total Physical Response) as well as the use of relia with those students at the lowest proficiency levels. Native language support is given in the ENL program through talking with their peers. Technology is incorporated into the classroom to facilitate comprehension in ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies. Students are paired with each other and content area teachers incorporate ENL strategies in the classroom. The ENL teacher plans all lessons to address ELA common core standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The Spanish LAB is administered to all new entrants in grades K to 12 whose HLIS responses indicate a home language of Spanish and who are newly identified as ELLs based on NYSITELL results. It is administered throughout the year as necessary. Therefore, those students who were given the Spanish LAB, receive a Spanish version ot the New York State Common Core Math Test. Students who's home language is not Spanish may have a translator come to the school on the days of the test to translate the English to their own language. The NYS math test is provided in Spanish for those ELLs whose home language is Spanish. For other languages a translator will be asked to come to the school and sit with the student during the test and translate the questions to the student. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 1  SIFE students will receive small group instruction including a high level of scaffolding for content information. The ENL teacher will work with the classroom teacher to assist with student transitions. All ELLs will receive instruction through visuals, scaffolded instruction as well as grouping them according to their needs. ELLs that have received ENL services for less than three years are either beginners or intermediate level students. These students receive eight periods of ENL instruction per week. In their regular classrooms, they are allowed to use non verbal ways to demonstrate knowledge and comprehension. Total Physical Response is used also in the lower grades. Graphic organizers, and hands on activities will be utilized to develop communicative and academic skills. Non speaking students will be provided with a buddy student as well as a staff member to assist with daily school work and other issues. For students who have received service for 4 to 6 years, the goal is to continue develop cross-cultural attitudes. We use visual aids and hand out activities to deliver content. As with all ELLs, we speak slowly, clearly, repeating and avoiding idioms. We focus on the areas of each individual needs. Expanding students who have received ENL services for more than six years will receive instruction in academic vocabulary (tier 2 words), argumentative writing skills and how to write a research paper. Commanding students, in addition to the mandated 90 minutes of ENL instruction per week. The former ELLs receive the same testing accommodations as the entitled ELLs and that is communicated with all the students teachers. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? There is articulation between the ENL teacher and the Special Education teacher to align instruction to the students needs as recommended by their IEP as well as providing students with the instructional ENL minutes based on their proficiency level and the CR part 154 regulations. In addition, the instructional plan for alternative placement Special Education is to provide visual aids and audio teaching materials. Students are encouraged to make connections between the second language and their own cultures. Prior knowledge is used to boost the ENL students’ cognitive and academic development. Teachers of ELL/SWD utilize the multiple entry points and scaffolding strategies provided by the Core Curriculum materials that are used in all classrooms. (RReady-Gen, Go Math, Codex and CMP3.)Additionally, a great emphasis on visuals, technology, modeling and cooperative learning are implemented. Teachers will also provide instruction in ELA using a guided reading approach. This model; will accelerate English language acquisition by providing instruction to students at their instructional reading level. ENL teacher uses "Visions" text books as a supplementary resource. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ENL teacher works closely with the Special Education teacher in order to create a schedule that both enables them to help the children receive their required hours as well as not infringing on their ELA classes and Math classes. The schedule developed for Entering and Emerging students provides for ENL to take place (stand alone) while the rest of the class is receiving ELA instruction. The ENL class provides these students with their ELA instruction. In ENL classes, instruction is modeled on the same process as in the classroom with a focus on language development and phonics instruction. ELL-SWD students are placed in the least restrictive environment as determined by the CSE. When possible, this is an ICT setting. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At PS/IS 041 we offer to all students, including ELLs, in grades 3-8 after school programs in ELA and MAth. Due to the small number of ELL's, there is no specific program to target a specific subgroup. This is an elementary school with common branch classes where the teacher provides support based on ESL strategies. The students are seated through flexible grouping as needed and individual assistance through conferencing and extended day for more interventions for the lower grades. Early childhood Ell's are part of that extended day program. All programs are offered in English. Instruction in all these programs focuses on the development of content area vocabulary. This covers all content areas and supports ELL students in their development of the English language skills. Tier 3 vocabulary is taught and dictionaries are available for Ells. Fundations, a targeted reading program provides support to students in grades K-3. Grades 4 through 8 utilized Ready NY. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 2  PS/IS 41 has modified its ELA instructional program in grades K-5 to include guided reading and independent reading and writing every day. It is expected that these changes will impact the acquisition of English for ELL students. Within the ELL program, there will be an increased focus on content area vocabulary that is grade/theme specific. This modification of instruction is based on school wide data that indicates only 8.7 percent of the all students are achieving mastery of the CCLS. On the NYSSELAT exam, students made progress or remained in the same proficiency level. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students have equal access to any and all programs offered at the school. They are invited to participate in the after school program, are considered for at-risk services. The after school program provides homework help, literacy and math support, physical and other recreational activities. The after school program is CBO run, five days a week for 3 hours. Admission to this program is on a first come first served basis and ELLS are represented in this program based on their parents choice. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The ENL teacher will follow standards based instruction. Technology will be incorporated with the aid of the Smartboard and individual computers to do research projects and learning how to navigate through the internet. ENL teacher is using "Visions" text book as a supplementary tool while "Ready Gen" is being used in the students' classroom . ELLIS software will be used for supporting non-English speaking students. PS/IS 41 has received 1:1 I-pads for students. These materials will be incorporated into the ELL program to support language acquisition. through the use of Edmentum, ELL's and ELL-SWD's are supported with the same Core Curriculum materials as the rest of the student population. This includes Glencoe Science, Houghton-Mifflen Social studies, informative test reading material. The content area and ELA/MAth materials are available and used as on-line resources as well. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Students are paired with each other to provide native language support as well as provided with bilingual dictionaries and glossaries. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services are aligned with the appropriate grade and age. Proficiency is also a factor but does not interfere as the goal is for English language development and age is not an issue. Homeroom placement is based on a child's age, while ENL services are based on proficiency levels. When possible, older students are grouped together when they are beginners. The same applies to ELL-SWD students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school is shared with a pre-kindergarten school . We do not share any resources as they are an entirely separate school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We provide support for the transition of Pre-K students from local programs into our school. This is done through an open house in the spring. During the school year, newly enrolled ELL's are matched with a same grade bilingual "buddy" student to help them navigate the school and the daily routines. New students are taken on a tour of the first floor with their parents. This transition program is conducted with the support of the Kindergarten teachers, the principal and the ENL teacher. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 3  18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? To ensure the best learning results from the ENL students, training and support will be given to classroom teachers, special education teachers by the ENL teacher. The PD’s offered are all engaged in the Common Core and show different methodologies which will enable teachers to better access the Common Core for ELL’s and for the general population. PD offered by the BFSC will be attended by the ENL teacher (dates TBD) In addition, support and professional development in ENL strategies will be provided to the staff by the ENL teacher on dates TBA.. Teacher leaders in the school will provide ongoing support in CCLS acquisition for all students including ELLs. This PD will take place ongoing on Mondays throughout the year. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL coordinator must provide seven hours of PDs to the rest of the staff per year. ENL coordinator goes to various ENL PDs and " turns key" at PS/IS 41. The ENL coordinator must make sure to attend 50% of all PDs to be ENL oriented. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parent engagement time will be used by the ENL teacher to schedule weekly meetings for specific parents. A schedule/calendar for these meetings will be established and translators will be provided by in house translators, or phone translation by the language and interpretation unit.. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The school has a challenge with general parent involvement. Monthly family nights are held to recognize students and engage in a family activity such as T-Shirt making, craft night etc. Two nights of parent workshops will also be held. Currently, the family engagement team works with the parent Coordinator in scheduling planning and carrying out events. Translation services are provided by in-house staff. 4  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Theresa Siegel, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS/IS 41 School DBN: 23K041 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Shonelle Hall Title Principal Kripanand Mohan Assistant Principal Velma Gamble Parent Coordinator Sharon Peritz ENL/Bilingual Teacher Delia Vargas Parent Rhontica Carson Teacher/Subject Area Gloria Tingue Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Barbara Lino School Counselor Miatheresa Pate Camilla Holmes Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/18/2017 10/18/2017 10/18/2017 10/18/2017 10/18/2017 10/18/2017 10/18/2017 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/18/2017 1/1/01/2017 1/1/01/2017 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 23K041 School Name: Francis White Superintendent: M. de Govia The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The written and oral language preferences of the parent community are assessed through a review of the Home language surveys and the preferred language section of the survey. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 8 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Preferred languages are English, Spanish, Bengali and Fulani. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Parent Handbooks, calendars and newsletters,parent teacher conference notices, after-school information, testing calendars, notifications from the district office and the Department of Education, How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent teacher conferences-November and March, curriculum nights-September and May, Parent workshops, December and February, ongoing parent/teacher meetings every Tuesday,SchoolMessenger phone calls, Dean phone calls, school psychologist outreach for evalautions. 9  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents will complete a survey midyear and a focus group will be gathered to provide feedback on services provided. 0 
