 13K044 School Name: P.S. 044 MARCUS GARVEY Principal: ROXANNE JAMES   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 44 – Marcus Garvey Elementary School 331300010044 PK, 0K, 01,02, 03, 04, 05 School Number (DBN): 13K044 432 Monroe Street, Brooklyn New York 11221 (718) 834-6939 Phone Number: (718) 574-8501 Fax: Roxanne James Rjames6@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Roxanne James Email Address: Helena Johnson-McKesey Dionna Hodges Deborah Lewis Lawrence Bernard Kadiatou Diallo Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Robert Cornegy District Information Geographical District: 13 Superintendent’s Office Address: Barbara Freeman Superintendent: 335 Park Pl, Brooklyn NY 11238 Bfreeman6@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 626-3284 Phone Number: 718-935-4314 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn NY BFitzege2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-2382 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Roxanne James Helena Johnson Dionna Hodges Geneva Jenkins Lawrence Bernard Ayana Gauntlett Theresa Cottle Irene Garcia *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Parent Parent Parent   Name Wonda Baynes-Collins Janay Parker Deborah Lewis Marsha Pierre Louella Gordon Samia Idris Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Parent Parent Teacher Teacher Secretary Paraprofessional Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission: Section 4: CEP Overview The PS 44, The Marcus Garvey Elementary School’s mission is to provide a safe, nurturing environment that develops the gifts and talents of all students. Through innovative teaching, collaboration among staff, parents and community, children will become independent thinkers in a global society.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Community: PS 44 is small school located in the heart of Bedford Stuyvesant in Brooklyn and services students from grades Pre-K to 5. The current enrollment of the school is 136 students comprised of .74% Asian, 83.82% Black, 11.03% Hispanic, and 4.41% White. English Language Learners comprise of 7.35% and Students with Disabilities comprise of 22.06%. There are 100% of students who are eligible to receive free lunch. The student population is heterogeneously grouped within each grade and supported by a pedagogical staff of 18. The school houses one (1) full day pre-k class, one (1) kindergarten classes, one (1) first grade class, one (1) K/I self contained special education class, one (1) second grade inclusion class, one (1) 2-3-4 self-contained special education class, one (1) third grade, one (1) fourth grade class, and one (1) fifth grade inclusion class. The average class size in kindergarten through fifth grade is twenty (20) students. Students are engaged in a variety of programs and enrichment activities such as: Ready Gen (Balanced Literacy); Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM); Material for the Arts; Instrumental Music; School-wide Chorus; Oratory Contest; Curriculum Related Field Trips; All day Pre-Kindergarten Program; Saturday Academy; Academic Enrichment Program; The Sanford Harmony Program; Move to Improve; and Special Education programs such as, Self-Contained, Integrated Co-Teaching, and Flexible Programming. Students are also engaged in a variety of free after-school Academic and Arts Education Programs such as, track, basketball, dance and theater. These programs and enrichment activities seek to provide students with multiple opportunities to develop their critical thinking skills, strengthen collaboration with peers, develop self-esteem, life-skills and self-reliance, and develop the necessary skills to become College and Career Ready. Our school believes that developing student voice is paramount. PS 44 has a vibrant Student Government Organization. In addition to the Student Government Executive Board each class has two representatives. These students work collaboratively to come up with ways to discourage peer abuse, increase peer understanding and respect for personal, economic and cultural differences. Activities have included the collection of food and money for the homeless and battered women, implementing newsletters, and a mentoring program. Our students take an active role informing their parents of their academic and social progress through Student-Lead Conferences during Parent-Teacher Conferences. School wide morning assemblies in which the school community sings the school song, recites the school's pledge, practice Math Fluency, and receive "100% Daily Class Attendance" certificates are reminders of our values and expectations for every student and adult. With the full implementation of the Common Core Learning Standards our Professional Learning Community continues to collaborate to decrease learning gaps and increase student achievement. In order to meet the challenge of having all students reading and writing on or above grade level standards and mastering mathematical problem solving skills we are continuing to provide professional development for staff in Balanced Literacy and Mathematics through Generation Ready Education Consultants. Administrators and staff have revisited and revised the foundational skills for lifelong literacy success by enhancing our phonemic awareness and phonics program. Our goal is to have our teachers better prepared to assess, enrich and give Academic Intervention Services (AIS). Current strategies for improving instruction and student performance in English Language Arts include a Balanced Literacy Approach for reading, which consists of: independent/paired reading, shared reading, guided reading, literacy centers, writer's workshop, interactive read aloud, word study/phonics, and teacher/student reading and writing conferences. 0  PS 44 has developed it's Professional Learning Community (PLC) that is coordinated by a Professional Development Team which includes the Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Leadership Team (ILT) , Consultants, Instructional Leads from the Division of Teaching and Learning, Brooklyn North Field Support Center, who work together to combine ideas on effective planning, different ways to assess learning and developing curricula and instructional materials. Through our Professional Learning Community, teachers have a voice in key decisions that affect teacher practice and student learning and they learn from the successful practices of their colleagues. The Danielson Framework for Teaching provides staff a structure for describing and discussing excellence through inter-visitations. Using Danielson's Framework as a formative tool for growth to support teachers' professional learning we create a shared understanding of best practices. Public School 44 takes a data-driven approach to improving student performance using a variety of assessments. Various assessment data is analyzed in all grades and vertical team meetings to determine instructional next steps. This data includes the following: DRA2, Go Math, Exemplars, Social Studies and Science Unit Exams, Writing Performance Tasks, MOSL and Fitness Gram. After analyzing data, curriculum maps are revised to include needed changes. School-wide, all teachers and students use various rubrics and checklists in areas of ELA and Math for ongoing assessment. The goal is for all students, including English Language Learners and Special Needs students to receive proficiency or above grade level standard, and to be college and career ready. Strategic Partnerships: With the support of the Parent Coordinator, the school offers a specialized support group for parents through the NYC Health Department. We engage in a partnership with Brookdale University Hospital to offer a variety of Health and Wellness activities geared towards promoting a healthy lifestyle for families and the school community. The Circle of Security: Parenting Series seeks to help parents and caregivers understand and respond to their child’s feelings and behaviors. Additionally, we have begun a partnership with New York Psychotherapy and Counseling Center (NYPCC) to provide prevention and outreach workshops for families and the school community. To enhance our Arts program, we have engaged in partnerships with the Society of the Educational Arts (SEA) and Materials for the Arts (MFTA). To enhance the STEM educational program, we have engaged in a partnership with City College of New York. Through this partnership students are engaged in innovative hands-on curriculum. Public School 44 has a Leadership Team that is comprised of parents, staff, and administrators. We strive for equity and excellence for all of our students. We continue to seek additional resources and greater access to current methodology so we can continue to develop a sound program that will give our children the skills and knowledge to thrive educationally, socially and emotionally. Enhancing rigorous instruction for all learners has been a pertinent goal for our school. During our last Quality Review (2017-2018), we were rated Proficient in all Instructional Core areas (1.1; 1.2; 2.2). Although students in grades 3-5 showed a significant increase on the New York State math exam in 2017-2018, we will continue to strive to ensure all student perform at or above proficiency level. As a result, our 2018-19 mathematics and English Language Arts' focus will continue to center around improving student learning, rigor in instruction and the Common Core State Standards. In the other content areas, we will build upon the instructional goals identified in our C.E.P. from the 2017-2018 school year. In order to accelerate and to ensure our students reading ability, our instructional focus in 2018-2019 is: all Marcus Garvey Elementary School students will read at or above grade proficiency levels as measured by DRA 2. Teachers will implement long and short term goals as they track students' progress towards increased reading comprehension skills. Success will be measured by student 1  performance on the DRA 2 rubric, NYS ELA Exam, and MOSL (Measure of Student Learning) performance task assessments. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. One of the special student populations that need attention are the ELLs. We have 10 ELLs, (7.35%) who need intensive support to develop their reading and writing skills. The majority of them are doing well as for developing the listening and speaking skills. In addition, of this group, the new comer ELLs (less than three years of ENL service) who represent the majority of our ELLs (7.35%) are in the process of developing comprehension skills in English, which means the need to work in smaller groups and additional comprehension strategies. They need to develop academic language in order to help them in the content area. Another population that has specific needs is the students with IEPs. Although, they have shown growth in the area of reading fluency, they still need to develop higher order thinking reading comprehension skills. In addition, they need to improve their thinking process in writing by providing elaborate details. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. According to the 2017-18 School Quality Guide Survey Elements (Framework Elements not available until Fall) PS 44 has improved in all areas (Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, Supportive Environment, Trust and Strong Family-Community Ties. We have exceeded our progress from last year toward the strong Family-Community ties element of the Framework for Great Schools. Strengthening the partnerships we have with parents is of utmost importance and inspires the school to provide families with an array of opportunities to engage in our school community. PS 44 hosts a variety of special events such as the Marcus Garvey Feast, Craft Night, Career Day, Spelling Bee, Parents as Math Partners, Parents as Reading Partners, Coffee with the Principal, Saturday Academy to aid parents with supporting their students academically, and Family Fun Field Day. As a result of ongoing collaboration within the school community, parental engagement, and students' achievement thrive. We would like to add a more personal touch to reaching out to our parent body. We plan to make home visits and telephone calls to encourage more parents to participate in school activities. According to our 2017-2018 Quality Review Report, school leaders consistently communicates high expectations to the entire staff, and this is an area of celebration. School leaders and staff consistently communicates to students and parents expectations that are connected to a path to college and career readiness. The school staff is provided training and school leadership has a system of accountability for meeting the expectations. School leaders and staff help families understand their children's progress toward set expectations. Additionally, February 9, 2018 Principal Performance Observation visit feedback stated that the principal, "Communicate expectations of professionalism, communication, and instruction to the staff and support them through professional learning and systems and structures that heighten internal accountability. You communicate to teachers your expectations of quality feedback to families and supports and guidance needed for student to be prepared for the next level." (3.4) 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 13K044 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 139 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 19 19 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 10 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 94.2% % Reduced Lunch 10.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.7% 9.4% 3.6% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.1 0% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 28.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 69% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 8 8 88.6% 2.2% 20.9% 83.5% 2.9% 0.7% 2 0% 5.8 28.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YSH YSH N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Looking at our current data (percentage of students who met NYS ELA and Math Proficiency as compared to last school year), PS 44 made some progress in grade 3 ELA (3.8% progress) and grade 4 ELA (8.7% progress. An area of celebration would be progress in grade 5 Math (18.57% increase) An area of focus would be on third grade math (70.59% met proficiency) and fourth grade math (73.91 met proficiency.) ELA 3rd Grade 4th Grade 5th Grade 2018 94.12 82.61 80 2017 90.32 73.91 85.71 Progress (+/-) 3.8 8.7 -5.71 *Data retrieved from RASP report via ATS for 2018 and 2017 Math 3rd Grade 4th Grade 5th Grade 2018 70.59 73.91 90 2017 83.87 75 71.43 Progress (+/-) -13.28 -1.09 18.57 *Data retrieved from RASP report via ATS for 2018 and 2017 According to the 2017-18 NYS ELA exam data for grades 3-5, the number of all students proficient in ELA increased 4.57% when compared to the 2016-2017 NYS ELA exam and there is an upward trend of growth within all subgroups. However, the greatest growth was within the Hispanic and Male subgroups. More specifically, an increase of 15.33% of Hispanic student performing in Levels and 4 and an increase of 6.43 in male students scoring in Levels 3 and 4. An area of concern on ELA NYS test data from April 2018 also revealed that 88.23% of grade 3 students performed below grade level proficiency; 57.14 % of grade 4 students performed below grade level proficiency; and 72.22% of grade 5 students performed below grade level proficiency. As a result, a total of 71.43% of all grade 3-5 students performing below grade level proficiency. 4  NYS ELA State Test Proficient Percentage ELA State Test Subgroups All students Female Male Black or African American Hispanic General Education Students with Disabilities 2016- 2017 % Proficient (levels 3 and 4) 24% 32% 15% 2017- 2018 % Proficient (levels 3 and 4) 28.57% 35.71% 21.43% Increase in Percentage from 2016-17 4.57% 3.71% 6.43% 26% 18% 28% 8% 29.55% 33.33% 31.52% 9.05% 3.55% 15.33% 3.52% 1.05% A comparison of the overall math proficiency from 2016-2017 and 2017-2018 school year, shows that Public School 44 is on an upward trend for students performing within subgroups and in Levels 3 and 4 in math. On the 2016-2017 NYS Grades 3-5 Math Exam, 24% of all students tested achieved a Level 3 or 4. On the 2017- 2018 NYS Grades 3-5 Math Exam, 28.57% of of all students tested achieved a level 3 or 4 in mathematics. Resulting in a 4.57% increase of the number of students achieving a Level 3 or 4 on the NYS Grades 3-5 Math Exam. The 2017-18 NYS Math State test data below shows growth occurred within all subgroups. However, the greatest proficiency percentages were in the General education and Male subgroups. More specifically, an increase of 4.57% of males performing in Levels 3 and 4 and the same percentage of 4.57% of general education performing in Levels 3 and 4. An area of concern on Math NYS State test exam data from April 2018 also revealed that 64.71% of grade 3 students performed below grade level proficiency; 71.42% of grade 4 students performed below grade level proficiency; and 77.78% of grade 5 students performed below grade level proficiency. As a result, a total of 71.43% of all grade 3-5 students performing below grade level proficiency. NYS Math State Test Proficient Percentage 5  Subgroups 2016- 2017 % Proficient (levels 3 and 4) 2017- 2018 % Proficient (levels 3 and 4) All students Female Male Black or African American Hispanic General Education Students with Disabilities 24% 25% 24% 20% 56% 24% 25% 28.57% 28.57% 28.57% 27.27% 22.22% 27.08% 26.59% Increase in Percentage from 2016-17 4.57% 3.57% 4.57% 2.27% -33.33% 3.08% 1.59% To address our ELA and Math concerns, targeted goals for student performance will be developed and shared with staff in the beginning of the school year. Progress monitoring will be scheduled and followed up to ensure the school is on track to meet the set goals, and adjustments will be made if data shows problematic situations. As a result, our 2018-19 instructional goals will center around improving students' academic progress, and building teacher content knowledge and pedagogical skills as they relate to the Common Core Standards. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all students, including ELLs and SWDs, in grades 3-5 will increase overall proficiency levels on the ELA and Mathematics New York State exams by at least 5% compared to the 2017-2018 New York State ELA and Mathematics State exams. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Through aggregated data analysis, targeted CCLS in ELA and Mathematics will be identified and shared with staff in order for all stakeholders to plan next steps for students. Collaboratively, strategies for teaching math and ELA will be identified and shared. These strategies will help all students deepen and communicate their critical thinking skills and mathematical reasoning. All students, Pre-K - 5th grade including English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Teachers well identify the difference between social conventions of mathematics and mathematical knowledge that students need to make sense of for themselves. Alignment of our math unit maps for Go Math. Engage New York, Exemplars Problem Solving , Number Talks (3 times weekly) will be reflected in teachers' planning and practice. Through a workshop model approach to instruction in this subject area, students will develop conceptual understanding, procedural fluency and problem solving. Instruction will be grounded in developing essential understandings, not just skills or procedures. Students will be required to explain their thinking verbally and in writing, reason and problem solve, use mathematical language, show their answer in multiple ways and compute accurately. Unit maps will be continually annotated throughout the year as part of teacher team meetings and professional development in order to plan effective instruction for all student Teachers Paraprofessionals All students, Pre-K - 5th grade, including English Language Learners and students with disabilities Sept. 2018 - October 2018 Principal, Assistant Principal and teachers Monthly Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, teachers, and consultants. Administrators and consultants. Monthly Sept. 2018 to June 2019 7 All students Ongoing Principal, Assistant Principal and teachers Oct. 2018-May 2019 Continuation of the Focused Math, Talk Moves and Daily Warm-ups in Mathematics programs to meet the needs of Tier 1 and 2 students. Math Stations at least once a week with the increased utilization of technology in the classrooms. All K-5 teachers will teach math instruction in 90 minute blocks at least 4 times a week. Jan. - May Generation Ready Consultant All students 2019 Online NYS CCLS math aligned Prodigy games for grades K-5. All teachers will be trained. Teachers will engage in creating high-level tasks to develop problem solving and thinking skills. Through on-going discussions and close examination of tasks, teachers will collaborate to transform low-level tasks to higher-level tasks. All students Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers will select tasks and use classroom discussions to develop students' ELA/mathematical habits of mind and assess understanding. ReadyGen curriculum and our Balanced Literacy model represents 50% narrative study and 50% expository study, and word work. The ELA instruction consists of whole class reading and response to literature, response to informational reading through Article of a Day, close reading, independent reading and creative writing, guided and buddy reading. Through explicit and systemic teaching in these areas, students will be provided with rigorous opportunities to apply comprehension strategies, critical thinking strategies and high-level discussion around complex texts. Our writing instruction will provide daily time for students to independently apply writing techniques, use the writing process to effectively write for a variety of purposes, and create an engaged community of writers. Vertical, Grade, and Inquiry team meetings will focus on standards-based data driven instruction (4 data cycles) in mathematics and English Language Arts. All Students Ongoing Sept.-May 2018-19 Prodigy Staff Developer for D13 All teachers, Principal, Assistant Principal 8  Jan. - April 2019 Ongoing Oct.-May 2018-19 Principal, Assistant Principal Principal, Assistant Principal, Staff developers, Teacher Leaders Teachers, Principal, Assistant Principal January-June 2019 Implementation of English Language Arts and Math New York State Test Prep After-school and Saturday Success programs in grades 3-5. Teachers Progress monitoring and follow up to ensure the school is on track in meeting math and ELA goals. Adjustments will be made if data shows problematic situations. Staff developers will mentor and facilitate one-on-one/school-wide professional development, and monitor the quality of instruction to ensure coherence across grades. Teachers will collaborate to revise assessments, revise pacing calendars and develop aligned unit maps in all content areas, including social studies. During the month of January, P.S. 44 conducts the mid-term assessment in order to monitor the students’ progress in ELA (reading and writing), math, science and social studies. Based on the scores of these assessments the will modify/improve its plans in order to achieve the academic goals set at for each grade level. In addition, other formative and summative assessments will be conducted throughout the school to inform instruction and improve planning. These include:  Grade math/ELA goals will periodically monitor (Sept./Dec./Mar/May) for each grade in order to identify areas of growth and areas in need of improvement.  DRA 2 assessment will be conducted and analyzed three time a year (long term goal), and Reading Records will be done every six weeks to closely monitor students reading progress and plan additional skills/strategies, and guided reading instruction, in order for every student to be reading at or above grade level expectation. 9  On Demand and End of Unit writing performance task will be conducted, analyzed, and next steps will be planned for students.  ELA Performance Task (MOSL) will be conducted.  Go Math beginning of year, mid-year, and end of year assessments will be analyzed to identify areas of growth and areas in need of improvement.  Teachers will analyze monthly Go Math Unit Assessments and tasks from Exemplar, and group students according to instructional needs to provide needed remediation or enrichment.  Reading and writing assessments will be taken into consideration when monitoring math problem solving proficiency, as literacy ability can impact student performance on Exemplar tasks. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school conducts different workshops for parents throughout the school year in order to inform parents and families in the understanding of the Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core. In the second week of September, during the Parent's Night, administrators explain to parents what is meant by Rigorous Instruction and provide them with suggestions to help their children at home. Then parents will join their children's teacher who will give additional details about the Common Core of each their grade level and strategies parents can use to help their children. Student-led conferences are held from the first Parent-Teacher conference in November. During this conference, students have discussion over their portfolio of work, showcasing their progress towards goals and their understanding of the performance towards the Common Core Standards. Teachers then follow through with additional information. Parents are also invited to visit their children's classrooms for "Parents as Reading Partners" in October, December, February and April. They are also invited to visit the classrooms for "Parents as Math Partners" in November, January, March and May. Teachers send home monthly newsletters and hold in-class publishing celebrations to inform families as to current units of study. As parents visit the classroom, teachers update the parents about their children performance in reading or math and provide additional suggestions to help the children at home. Moreover, parents are invited monthly to "Coffee with the Principal" sessions in which the Principal updates and provides additional tips about how to help children at home. Parents are encouraged to voice their concerns and suggest ways to improve the school's performance. Parents will be invited to attend instructional morning (once a month) meetings where they learn alongside their child in the classroom setting. Parent workshops will be held to inform parents of the CCLS, and to deepen their understanding of the shifts in literacy and mathematics, and how they can support their children at home. Parents of ELL and SWDs will attend meetings to discuss school goals and the role they need to play in order for each student to achieve his/her goal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 0   Instructional supplies to support reading and math intervention will include the use of Go Math, and Ready Gen as the core resources.  Technology resources including the use of i-pads, laptops and web-based reading resources.  Human Resources (Per-session and Per-Diem for Teachers, Instructional Consultants and Administrators) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-Year Benchmark:  By January 2019, at least 40% of all students tested will score within the 70-89% range on the GO Math mid-year assessment (as compared to the beginning of the year baseline assessment administered in September).  By January 2019, at least 50% of all students will reach independent proficiency level based on the grade level DRA 2 Assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.)  DRA 2 Assessments for ELA  Go Math Baseline Assessment and Exemplars (October 2018)  Go Math Interim Assessment and Exemplars (January 2019) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Public School 44 is learning community that supports the academic and social needs of all students. Through our rigorous curriculum and social emotional initiatives, we foster a school where all students feel safe, secure, supported, and are encouraged to work hard. The 2017-2018 the Learning Environment Survey showed a score of 3.33 (74%) on the Classroom Behavior category relating to the element of Supportive Environment. An analysis of the data in the 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey, showed that the school scored a 100% in the areas of Peer Support for Academic Work and Safety. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our School Quality Guide score relating to Classroom Behavior in the “Supportive Environment” element of the Framework for Great Schools will have a net increase from 3.33 to 4.99. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Faculty led groups - Weekly Sanford Harmony classroom meetings - Monthly students government meetings - Monthly boys and girls clubs School faculties will discuss with students the importance of developing positive social emotional behaviors. Through conversations, videos, role playing and texts, students will develop a list of acceptable classroom behavior practices, that they agree to adhere to, monitor and be awarded for. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students K-5 Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration, and all school faculty Partnership with New York Psychotherapy and Counseling Center Selected students exhibiting counter-productive behaviors and those at risk of academic failure will be supported by a trained professional who will work on coping strategies, regulating and monitoring negative behaviors, and improving peer relationships. Selected Students (K-5) Sept.2018 - June 2019 Administration, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Mental Health Coordinator 3  Student Social/Emotional Needs Survey Students (Grades 2-5) Sept.2018 - June 2019 Administration and Faculty Students will complete the social/emotional survey to introduce themselves, name an adult mentor in the school they can talk to, identify behavior issues and set goals towards classroom behavior practices. Teachers will continue to inspire students' socio-emotional well being through the utilization of the Sanford Harmony Program and the Seven Habits of Highly Effective Students. These habits will be woven seamlessly into everyday instruction, thereby building a strong sense of trust and urgency into students' daily practices. Teachers will develop a shared belief in the importance of learning, and convey high expectations for learning for all students and insist on hard work. Students will set academic and social-emotional goals across the school year. Staff will analyze data around disproportionality, understand the root causes, and find effective strategies and tools to move towards equity for all students. Habits and Behaviors Self-Monitoring Recording Sheet. Students will monitor their behaviors i and out of the classroom focusing on the school values or the habits of mind characteristic taught and their implementation of said value or habit. - Students will have the value sheet signed by their parents - Sheets will be discussed during PTC In-school Students Recognition Practices - Bucket Filler Wall - Awards Assemblies -Lunch with the Principal - Pizza Parties 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers and students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Principal, Assistant Principal, and Staff developers Students (Grades 2-5) Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Principal, Assistant Principal. Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Principal, Assistant Principal. Students Government, Parent Coordinator , Parents How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. One of the topics that will be discussed with parents during the "Parents' Night" in September is the importance of having a school supportive environment which will have a great impact on the children's social emotional growth as well as their academic performance. Throughout the school year, parents of all students, including ELLs and SWDs will 4  attend a series of workshops in order to enhance their parenting skills. These workshops, facilitated by the parent coordinator, District 13 mental health coordinator and school faculty, include "Dads Bring Their Child to School", "The Benefits of a Success Family-School Relationships", " We All Want Healthy Children", "Understanding Mental Health and How to Help Someone", "Father and Son Tournament" and "Raising an Emotionally Healthy Child". Student-Led Conferences for grades 2-5 will focus on self-reflective goals for both academic and social-emotional skills. The School Implementation Team will meet regularly with parents to address students' social emotional needs and provide parents with skills and strategies to support their children at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will participate in social emotional professional development sessions that will include Sanford Harmony, the Seven Habits of Highly Effective Students, Autism Spectrum Disorder, Respect for All, and Intervention Support, Peer Mediation, Mentoring and Collaborative Problem Solving. These workshops will be facilitated by District 13 mental health coordinator and the New York Psychotherapy and Counseling Center staff. Bi-weekly, the social worker and guidance counselor will meet with students of the boys and girls club to discuss issues facing them and find possible solutions. Every Friday, the school during assemblies, the school will publicly acknowledge students demonstrating exceptional positive behavior. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the score relating to Classroom Behavior in the “Supportive Environment” element of the Framework for Great Schools will have a net increase from 3.33 to 4.25 as measured by teachers' feedback, anecdotal records, OORS reports, and Students Behavior Intervention plans. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. - Students social/emotional needs survey - Students Self Monitoring Sheet - Parent Teacher Conference feedback - Learning Environment Survey results 5  -OORS Reports - Student Behavior Intervention Plan Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017- 2018 Quality Review (QR), PS 44 was rated proficient in all categories ( Instructional Core, School Culture and Systems of Improvement.) One strength from QR 1.1 (curriculum), the impact observed was the school's curricula promote college and career readiness for all students. All students, including English Language Learners (ELLs) and Students with Disabilities (SWDs), have access to curricula and are cognitively engaged. Another strength from QR 1.2 (pedagogy) the impact observed students across classrooms produce meaningful student work products, though in some cases there are missed opportunities for students to collaborate in student-student discussions and deepen their thinking through demonstrating their understanding or via strategic supports. One priority need based on feedback from the QR 1.2 (pedagogy) is based on teaching practices and articulated beliefs. In some classrooms, there were missed opportunities to incorporate discussions or connect the strategy taught to student tasks. Another priority need based on feedback from the QR 1.2 (pedagogy) is that although students received tiered tasks that allowed them to practice the skills or strategies taught with different text or math problems, this practice was not consistent across the vast majority of classrooms and there were missed opportunities to provide strategic extensions. Another finding from the 2017-2018 Quality Review is that teachers are engaged in structured, inquiry-based collaborations such as vertical teams. This impacted teachers' collaborations and strengthened their instructional capacity and promotes the achievement of school goals. As a result of inquiry-based collaborations, teachers have strengthened their instructional capacity in assessment practices, lesson planning, and identifying new strategies to support student learning. This practice also deepened teachers' content knowledge and ensured students received consistent feedback across the school. (4.2) Another priority need based on the December 2017-18 Principal Performance Observation (P.P.O.), the reviewer states "the school's teaching practices across classes are beginning to reflect instructional practices that are intellectually challenging, differentiated and meet the academic needs of all learners. This school year the school is focusing on strengthening the methods of teachers and deepening the levels of student work and engagement. However, the school's core beliefs about how children learn best are uneven across classes. (1.2) Informed by the Framework for Great Schools element collaborative teaching, there is a need to refine the practice of teacher inquiry and comprehensive instructional planning in ELA/Mathematics for K through 5th grade." Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 7  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of Kindergarten to fifth grade teachers will be engaged in 4-6 week inquiry cycles to examine student progress in ELA and Mathematics to develop necessary interventions. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Continued annotation of our ELA unit maps for Ready Gen to reflect upon teacher practice, as well as include necessary strategies and structures that meet the needs of our student population across grades K-5. Units of study will be continually annotated throughout the year as part of teacher team meetings and professional development. The inquiry team will create literacy and mathematics goals to address (help meet) the annual school wide goal. These goals will be assessed quarterly. Teachers and Paraprofessionals Teachers and Paraprofessionals Monthly Principal and Assistant Principal Sept 2018 to June 2019 Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Generation Ready Staff Developer Principal and Assistant Principal Generation Ready Staff Developer Grade and Inquiry team meetings will focus on standards-based data driven instruction (4-6 week data cycles). Our focus will be to consistently assess, analyze and create action plans based on student mastery of appropriate grade level ELA and mathematics Common Core standards. Teachers will be provided with opportunities to share effective Literacy and Mathematics instruction during professional development, inter-visitations, and team meetings. Teachers and Paraprofessionals Sept 2018 Principal and Assistant Principal to June 2019 Generation Ready Staff Developer Teachers and Paraprofessionals Ongoing Principal and Assistant Principal Professional development will be provided throughout the school year on the ELA/math Common Core Learning Standards with a major focus on improving reading comprehension skills in all content areas. Teachers and Paraprofessionals Sept.-June 2018 & 2019 Ongoing Oct.2018-June 2019 Generation Ready Staff Developer Principal, Assistant Principal, and Brooklyn Field Support Center, Support Staff, Generation Ready Staff Developer Teachers, Principal, Assistant Principal Parents will be invited to have coffee with administrators, and to attend instructional mornings once a month where they learn alongside their child/children in the classroom setting. Parents Monthly Sept. 2018-June 2019 9 Parents will attend workshops in which topics of math and literacy CCLS are discussed and reviewed. Parents Oct. 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Principal, Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P.S. 44 engage families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and Strategies to promote teacher-parent collaborations by holding meetings at mutually convenient times that would allow the majority of parents to attend and get familiar and build trust with their children's teachers. During the "Parent Night" in September, parents after a general assembly, teachers will have break out sessions. Parents are also invited to the school to meet with their children's teachers every Tuesday, 2:40-3:10 p.m. which allow them to have individual attention from the teacher and have the time to share information that will help parents to support their children at home. Parents are also invited to attend "Parents as Math/Literacy Partners on a monthly basis, and "Math Game Night" in November, which allow them to learn ways to support their children in a fun way. Invitations will be extended to parents to join their children and learn beside them in our after-school programs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Classroom teachers and teacher teams will use common planning time to embed a variety of strategies to ensure that all students are intellectually engaged in challenging content that requires complex thinking by students.  Online technology supports/programs such as Prodigy, RAZ Kids, Ten Marks, I Know It, Kids A-Z, Newsela and Read Works.  Purchasing of Smart boards, laptops and Ipads.  After-school academic and enrichment programs.  Classroom teachers will provide the necessary scaffolds to ensure that and ELLS have multiple entry points into the learning tasks through whole group and small group differentiated instruction.  Generation Math staff developer will collaborate with teachers and administration to plan effective small group instruction, revise curricula units of study, and analyze student work products to inform instruction. Students will utilize Common Core aligned ELA and Math rubrics to assess their writing and the writing of their peers.   Teacher Per Session: Title I for After-school programs.  P.T.A. Title I Funding will be used to provide parents with English Language Arts and Math Saturday  workshops. In addition, Monday and Tuesday Collaborative Professional Learning time as well as Tuesday Parent Engagement Time will be utilized to support the implementation of this goal. Select teacher teams will turnkey information from professional development sessions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 0  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, 80% of teachers will have complete at lease two cycles of inquiry resulting in appropriate, differentiated adjustments to curricula in ELA and Math in grades K to 5. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The inquiry team uses The Blooming Protocol to look at data and students work.  MOSL  Math Rubric  Exemplar Rubric  Teachers College Reading/Writing Curricular rubrics Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Effective leadership enhances and nurtures the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. The 2017-2018 Quality Review report noted that, "School leaders have developed a system of accountability that holds all staff to high expectations. Professional development supports teachers to meet high expectations connected to the Danielson Framework for Teaching." Additionally, the 2017-2018 (February), PPO states that "The principal communicate expectations of professionalism, communication, and instruction to the staff and support them through professional learning and systems and structures that heighten internal accountability. (3.4) The PPO also states that, "The principal supports the continued development of new teachers as well as structuring supports for those new to the school and profession with feedback, frequent visits to classrooms, reviews of student work, and data. The principal uses data from observations to support professional development plan and furure decisions on tenure and assignments.(4.1) One area of focus stated on the December 2017-2018 PPO is "Teaching practices across classes are beginning to reflect instructional practices that are intellectually challenging, differentiated and meet the academic needs of all learners. This school year you are focusing on strengthening the methods of your teachers and deepening the levels of student work and engagement. However, your core beliefs about how children learn best are uneven across classes."(1.2) The school needs to utilize the Danielson Framework to make explicit the attributes of effective instruction across Domain 3. The school also needs to "Make explicit the practices need to check for understanding throughout lessons. (1.2) and to utilize Depth of Knowledge Matrix (DOK) in order to strengthen teacher questioning and student discussion." Another area of concern according to the 2017-2018 Quality Review report, "Across classrooms, teaching practices are aligned to the curricula and reflect the articulated set of beliefs that students learn best when they have time to engage in collaborative tasks and discussions and when teachers follow the workshop model. While teaching practices consistently provide multiple entry points into the curricula, high-quality supports and extensions vary across classrooms. While teaching practices were aligned to the articulated beliefs, in some classrooms there were missed opportunities to incorporate discussion or connect the strategy taught to student tasks." (1.2) According to the 2017-2018 end of year MOTP Component Distribution data collected, the ratings reflect effective for each component for teachers were 1a- Demonstrating Knowledge of Content and Pedagogy (81%), 1e - Designing Coherent Instruction (70%), 3b - Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques (72%), 3c - Engaging Students in Learning (89%), 3d - Using Assessment in Instruction (73%), and 4e - Growing and Developing Professionally (32% Highly Effective and 62% Effective.. After review of this data, we determined a need to focus on component 3b. Feedback from the instructional cabinet as well as teachers one to one conferences has shown that all teacher desire to be stronger in this area, in order to have a more impact on student growth. 2  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will create and implement a professional development plan that builds teachers' capacity to use differentiated questioning and discussion techniques for English Language Learners (ELLs), resulting in a 100% increase in teachers improving one performance level reflected in component 3b Questioning and Discussion Techniques in Advance. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School administrators will provide differentiated professional learning opportunities in ELA for all teachers. Teachers will demonstrate consistency of effective instructional approaches in designing coherent instruction. Discuss and distribute school-wide non-negotiable expectations, and monitor progress and provide timely feedback for growth, coherence, and sustainability. Teachers will design lessons utilizing the Learner-Centered Initiatives (LCI) and the Depth of Knowledge higher levels, to create more rigorous tasks and discussion techniques. Implementation of teaching strategies and practices that should be prevalent in all classrooms, and will be monitored on a daily basis through observations and walk throughs. School administrators and teacher teams will facilitate professional learning opportunities centered on student discourse developing rigorous tasks, through articles, books, and Teacher College Reading and Writing Staff Developer and the reading coach (k-2). All students, PK - 5th grades Teachers All Staff Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Teacher Leaders, and Staff Developers Sept. 2018-June 2019 All staff, Administrators and consultants Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators Oct. 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Teacher Leaders, TCRWP Staff 4  Administration will create flexible scheduling to allow teachers to collaborate in designing coherent instruction,embedding higher level questions . School leaders will facilitate the implementation of monthly cycles of professional learning to promote teacher understanding and implementation of Domain 3 of the Danielson Framework using: grade level teams, student work analysis protocols, inter-visitations, inquiry and vertical/horizontal collaborative planning. Teachers will focus on strengthening their questioning techniques embedding questions for multiple levels of thinking to better prompt students interpretive and critical thinking. Administrators will monitor the consistency of school wide practices and support when necessary. The Instructional Leadership Team will conduct focused walk-throughs to target the progress of the goal. School administrators will facilitate focused and concise rounds of planning sessions with individual teachers creating lessons rich with opportunities for rigorous questioning and discussion techniques and multiple entry points. Developer, Reading Coach Administrators Teachers Sept. 2018 June 2019 Teachers Teachers, Paraprofessionals and students Sept 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Lead Teachers and Talent Coach Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Administrators 5 Administrators will analyze Measure of Teacher Practice (MOTP) and provide differentiated professional learning in which teachers will be grouped based upon Advance data for domains 3b/c/d. Teachers, Parent Coordinator and paraprofessionals January 2018-May 2019 Administrators and Teacher Leaders, FSC Liaisons, District Office, Central Office Faculty, Staff, and Administrators will attend ongoing professional development offered by the Field Support Office and Central and bring back information to turnkey in the building. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. "Day in a Life of a Student" and "Parent as Reading Partners" events will be held monthly (October 2018 - May 2019)to familiarize parents to the school's instructional focus, goals and strategies that they can implement at home to support questioning and discussion. Skills and strategies will also be shared at Parent Teachers Association meetings, Coffee with the Principal mornings, and School Leadership meetings. Families will be given educational books and various supportive instructional technologies that students can access at home to help them further their understanding of what they are learning at school. Families will also be invited to Saturday Workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Administrators will schedule time on a monthly basis to meet with Cohort Team, TC Staff Developer, and teachers to discuss and monitor students' progress and teachers' growth in Domains 1E..  Development and implementation of teacher learning surveys in order to ascertain teacher needs around  identified Domains so that differentiated Professional Learning sessions may be provided. Identification of teachers who are consistently rated Effective or Highly Effective in Domains 3b/c/d in order to set up inter-visitations, horizontally and vertically.  Ongoing professional development will be provided by administration, FSC support and consultants to develop staff reciprocal teaching competencies.  Regular data inquiry meetings to assess and monitor effectiveness of instruction. Scheduling of weekly common planning periods for grade teams, and monthly Vertical Team meetings.   Materials such as, Enhancing Professional Practice, Learner- Centered Initiatives (LCI), A Framework For Teaching by Charlotte Danielson and Teach Like a Champion by Doug Lemov.  Engage New York resources.  Development of inter-visitation, observation, debriefing, and professional development sessions both on and off-site schedules.  Advance Data  Per session hours Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 6  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, school leaders will create and implement a professional development plan that builds teachers' capacity to use differentiated questioning and discussion techniques for English Language Learners (ELLs), resulting in a 70% increase in teachers improving one performance level reflected in component 3b Questioning and Discussion Techniques in Advance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Learning Walks checklist   Advance Dash Board Monitoring System  Teachers formal/ informal reports   Curriculum Maps Lesson/ Unit Plans Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-2018 Framework for Great schools PS 44 is Meeting the Element in Strong Family-Community Ties (3.4%). We are Meeting Framework Elements in Effective School Leadership, Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, Supportive Environment. We are approaching the elements of Trust, Supportive environment and student Achievement. According to the 2017-2018 Quality Review, "Ongoing communication and support by school leaders around classroom visits support teachers' understanding and awareness of expectations for teaching and learning. Communication from school leaders and teachers through newsletters and other strategies provide frequent opportunities for families to understand student progress towards meeting expectations. Review of faculty handbook reveals the sharing of high expectations around instructional design and delivery, grading policy, as well as professional responsibilities. Additionally, expectations connected to college and career readiness are shared with families through newsletters, coffee with the principal, and parent workshops... One parent shared and all agreed that teachers provide families with different online resources they can use at home."" (3.4) The school's staff is provided training and school leadership have a system of accountability for meeting the expectations. School leaders and staff help families understand their children's progress toward set expectations. A Family Handbook is provided to families and addresses areas including the school's mission, the Principal's vision, learning expectations, student progress, the middle school application process, and promotion criteria. As it relates to learning expectations, the handbook addresses rigorous and comprehensive Common Core-aligned classes and that all students are to achieve work that reaches grade level standard or above, every year. A parent compact is also provided, and addresses the school and parents working cooperatively to provide for the successful education of their children. This is done through participation in activities such as curriculum and content specific professional development workshops for parents. There is a need for more parents to participate in their child's education, and the school to enhance our ties with community organizations. The school has a small core of dedicated parents who support the school at multiple events and functions but there is a need to increase the amount of parent participation throughout the school year. While PS 44 has several ongoing partnerships with community agencies, there is a need to nurture these relationships by allocating more time to provide services to families. Additionally, the school needs to broaden partnerships with other community agencies in order to promote academic and social emotional development to support the success of our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal 8  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 50% of all parents will be engaged in school-wide activities that will target parents' understanding of grade level expectations and standards for students' success as evidenced in surveys and parents feedback forms. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept 2018- Oct 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal October 2018-June 2019 Parent coordinator, classroom teachers and administration Provide time to conference with parents. Discuss and distribute school-wide non-negotiable expectations, Family and Staff Handbook at PTA meetings, Curriculum evenings and Tuesdays Family evenings. Parents, Students, Staff Parents and Students Parent Surveys will provide feedback of ideas for workshops, appropriate time and venues, and parental activities geared toward families. Varied engaging parental workshops offered, such as Parents as Learning Partners In ELA and Math, STEM, Saturday Academy for Parents, etc., as evidenced through a Needs Assessment. Varied interactive student after-school academic and arts enrichment opportunities (Dance and Theater, Homework Help, technology and basketball) Parent coordinator will seek to broaden partnerships with local community agencies such as Banks, YMCA, 79th Precinct in order to promote academic and social development support for students and families. SIT and Attendance Team will use Tuesday parent engagement time to monitor issues regarding student absenteeism, lateness, and progress. In addition, plan targeted and strategic options to improve attendance issues which will be shared with staff. Parents and Students October 2018-June 2019 Attendance and SIT Team, administrators, staff, parent coordinator, District Family Advocate, Superintendent and BFSC. 0  Parent Engagement Tuesday sessions will include varied workshops for families. Reading materials will be made available to parents to increase their home libraries. Parents and Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers including ELL Teacher, parent coordinator ELL/SWD Parents Parent Coordinator and ENL/SWD teacher Oct 2018 Feb 2019 Parents and students Parents Sept 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Community Organizations and Phys. ed. teacher Parent Coordinator, Administration, Faculty and Staff Parent Coordinator, Social Worker, staff, and Community Liaison The school will provide translation services for those who need a translator Monthly translated Newsletters, Flyers, Monthly School Calendars will serve as invitations and reminders to parents to attend school activities. ELL and SWD workshops that will support about the ENL/SWD programs available in NYC and in our schools and how parents can select a program for their children, utilize online strategies, and community services for their children. Conduct health and wellness workshops with the goal of increasing students and family attention to nutrition and exercise. Student-lead Parent teacher conferences, curriculum mornings and nights, ongoing opportunities to engage families in celebrations of learning throughout the course of the day. These include publishing parties, attendance celebration, most improved and highly motivated students, content area experts, Pre-K open house, assemblies, etc. These events will increase parents understanding of what students need to know to meet grade level expectation and New York State standards in all content areas. Families Sept 2018-June 2019 Parent and school community concerns will be communicated to principal, to ensure issues are addressed in a timely and satisfactory manner. Outreach to families will be made. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 1   Black Man who Cares  YWCA  Cornell University  Brooklyn United  Quest Youth Organization Inc  Brookdale Hospital  Woodhall Hospital  Brooklyn District Council "36"  Brooklyn North Mental Health Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I SWP funds will be used to acquire materials to support academic success at home, i.e. test preparation, books, per-session funds to cover staff members facilitating Saturday Academy for Parents. Community Based Organizations will fund the SEA after-school enrichment opportunities for students. Parent Coordinator, SIT team and Administrators will collaborate to plan rich learning experiences for parents. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 25% of all parents will be engaged in school-wide activities that will target parents' understanding of grade-level expectations and New York State standards for students' success, as evidenced in surveys and parent feedback. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Track and maintain logs of formal and informal conversation with parents.  Parent Surveys  Various Attendance Sheets  Parent Feedback Forms  Parent/guardian responses to NYC Annual School Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ●K-3: Students Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● Ready Gen ● Small group ●During the school scoring between day 0% - 74% on the ● Good Habits/ Good ● One-to-one Beginning of the Readers tutoring Year Ready Gen Baseline ● Guided Reading ●Inquiry teams ●The Afterschool Literacy Academy will meet during the months of January - May, twice a week Assessment and target the lowest the NYCMOSL ● Shared Reading third of student Assessment(levels population 0-1 on traits) ● Interactive bygrade and Reading provide additional ●Gr 4: Students support ●The Saturday Literacy/Math Academy will meet on scheduled Saturdays during the months of January - May. whose scale scores ●Teachers College on the 2017-18NYS Writing ELA test fell below proficiencyon the ●Increasing volume 3 rdgrade NYS ELA through on test demand writing 3  and use of writing ●Gr 5: Students prompts whose scale scoreson the ●Sadlier Phonics 2017-18NYS ELA test fell below proficiency on the 4 th grade ●Daily Warm Up Reading ●Focused ELA NYS ELA test ●A Saturday Literacy/Math Academy for at-risk students in grades 3-5 will provide extra help to improve reading , writing and math skills. ● Go Math Mathematics ● K-3: Students ●At-risk students in grades 3,4,and 5 are offered the Saturday Literacy/Math Academy which will provide small group and one-on-one support ●Small group ●During the school scoring between day 0%- 74% on ● Exemplars ●One-to-one theBeginning of tutoring theYear Go Math ● Guided Math Baseline Groups ●Inquiry teams Assessment target the lowest ● Problem Solving third of student ● Gr 4: Students Friday’s population by whose scale scores gradeand provide ●The Literacy and Math Academy will meet on scheduled days during the months of January - June. 4  on the 2017-18NYS ●Grade Fluency additional support Math test fell below Practice proficiency on the 3 rdgrade NYS ●Writing in Mathtest Mathematics ●Gr 5: Students ●Focused Math ●At-risk students in grades 3,4,and 5 are offered the Saturday Literacy/Math Academy which will provide small group and one-on-one support whose scale scores on the 2017-18 NYS ELA test fell below proficiency on the 4thgradeNYS Math test ●K-3: Students Science ●A Saturday Literacy/Math Academy for at-risk students in grades 3-5 will provide extra help to improve reading , writing and math skills. ● Amplify Science ● Small group ●During the school scoring between texts (mentor) ● One-to-one 0% - 74% on the Beginning of the ●The scientific Year Ready Gen method through Baseline hands - on, writing Assessment incontent area ●CityTech STEM ●Gr 4: Students interactive whose scale scores curriculum on the 2017-18NYS ELAtest fell below proficiency on the day ●The Afterschool Science Test Practice willbe providedduring the months of May-June, twice a week 5  Social Studies 3rd grade NYS ELA test ● Gr 5: Students whose scale scores on the 2017-18NYS ELAtest fell below proficiencyon the 4 th grade NYS ELA test ● K-3: Students ● Passport to Social ●Small group ●During the school scoring between Studies day 0%- 74% on the ● Content area ●One-to-one Beginning of the vocabulary Year Ready Gen Baseline ●Writing in the Assessment content area ●Gr 4: Students ● Daily Warm Up whose scale scores on the 2017-18NYS ELAtestfell below proficiencyon the 3rdgrade NYS ELAtest 6  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) ●Gr 5: Students whose scale scores on the 2017-18NYS ELAtest fell below proficiencyon the 4thgrade NYSELAtest ●At-risk counseling ●Improve ●Small group ●During the school for students who concentration and day have parental focus on ●One-to-one consent and were academics referred by staff/ content area teachers ●Promote healthy socialization skills ●The Sanford Harmony Program ●Behavior intervention plans for at-risk students ●Follow up on suspensions 7  ● Counseling is offered to students on the short term basis of six weeks. These services are provided with parental consent 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Public School 44 currently has 21 students that are in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. PS 44 will provide a nurturing and supportive environment. We will purchase and supply students with uniforms, classroom supplies and other necessities that students may require that will make them feel comfortable in our school community. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9 Buy student uniforms, knapsacks and additional supplies and materials such as notebooks, pencils. Our SIT team has frequent conferences with parents. Boys and Girls clubs ran by the school social worker. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $4,200 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Build partnerships with local colleges to identify new staff ● Attend central and borough wide hiring fairs ● School administration will work with HR liaisons from FSC to ensure that all teachers are highly qualified 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  School administrators will collaborate with teachers to create individual professional development plans to ensure all teachers are highly qualified.  Teacher leaders will participate in off-site professional development and turn-key information to groups of  staff based on interest. In order to build a professional learning community staff who participate in ongoing on-site and off-site professional development will be given opportunities to facilitate workshops to share pertinent information to the whole school community. Staff will initiate inter-visitations internally and intra-visitations externally with partner schools.   To build coherence across classrooms, staff will collaboratively engage in horizontal and vertical planning.  Staff will collaborate to revise grading policies to share with parents the school community. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 1  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). ● Set up Pre-K & K Open House to meet with parents of transitioning Pre-K and K students ● Schedule Pre-K students and parents to visit kindergarten classrooms ● Promote DECE website for parents to obtain information regarding transitioning Pre-K students into kindergarten ● Encourage parents to attend Pre-K workshops for families within the school based on feedback from surveys ● Sharing of research articles, teacher, lesson plans, grading policies, and academic and social expectations with parents to assist them with transitioning 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● Instructional cabinet, administrators and MOSL team will help to select assessments that meet the needs of the school community based on school level data ● MOSL team members meet with administrators to discuss trends and gaps in assessment results from previous and the current school year Consult teaching staff to get consensus on selection of assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the 2  consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 217,927.00 Title II, Part A Federal 163,289.00 Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal 0 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 1,235,128.00 X X - - X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A through Section 5E, Part 3 Action Planand Part 4 Budget and Resource Section 5A through Section 5E, Part 3 Action Planand Part 4 Budget and Resource - - Section 5A through Section 5E, Part 3 Action Planand Part 4 Budget and Resource 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. 3  Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 13K044, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 44 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 5  ● Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the 6  assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g. ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA). ● Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent- Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; 7  ● Supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 13K044, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● Using academic learning time efficiently; ● Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● Offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). 8  Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 9  ● Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● Respecting the rights of limited English Proficient Families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child's participation. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; 0  ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● Attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● Show respect for myself, other people and property; ● Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 13 School Name Marcus Garvey Borough Brooklyn School Number 044 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Roxanne James Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Nabil Abdel Maksoud Teacher/Subject Area Marsha Pierre Teacher/Subject Area Anna Vedrine Related-Service Provider Superintendent Assistant Principal Nichele Holder Coach School Counselor Joyce Wingfield Parent Stephanie Dodson Parent Coordinator Cheryl Williams Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 1 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 135 2 Total number of ELLs 14 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.37%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 44 uses a variety of formative assessments in order to guide instructional planning for ELLs. Teachers in grades K-5 use DRA in order to assess the early literacy skills of all students. The data gathered from these assessments allows teachers to match students to their appropriate reading levels. This information also helps inform the school's instructional plan by pinpointing the skills that students have already acquired and those areas that require the most attention. The schools also uses TC writing performance tasks throughout the school year to assess the students’ writing skills. Teacher- created assessments are used by the ENL/ESL teacher to evaluate progress of the language skills for all ELLS. Speaking and listening teacher-created tests are administered in October, December and February, while Reading and writing are administered in November, January, and March. Other formative strategies used to assess students throughout the school year are criteria and goal setting, observations, questioning strategies, self and peer assessment and student record keeping. In addition, The ENL/ESL teacher and classroom teachers use the scores obtained from NYSITELL for the newly enrolled ELLs, the scores of the NYSESLAT from the previous year, and the other formative assessments done throughout the school year to guide 3  instructional planning for ELLs. The formative assessment and the curriculum-embedded assessments used to evaluate our ELLs in P.S. 44 revealed that 1 of our ELLs in kindergarten is at the Entering Level. In first grade, 1 student is at the Expanded Level and one at the Entering level. In second grade, tow ELLs are at the expanded level, one student at the Transitioning Level, one student at the Emerging level and 2 students at the Entering level. In third grade two students are at the expanded level. In fourth grade, one student (SWD) is at the Entering Level. In fifth grade one student is at the Expanding Level and 1 at the Entering level. These numbers are the current ones for school year 2017-2018. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In order to support the efforts done to use formative and curriculum-embedded assessments to guide instructional planning for our ELLs. As P.S. 044 has ELLs in all grades from K-5, the ENL teachers works with the homeroom teachers in order to plan for the sessions in which he pushes in during the integrated ENL sessions. He uses the unit plans prepared by the teachers in order to plan accordingly and to support ELLs during the content area session. In addition, there is an ongoing collaboration between the ENL teacher and the homeroom teachers as he checks what them at the beginning of the sessions he pulls out his ELLs. In addition, P.S. 44 has various structures that support the use of formative and curriculum-embedded assessment to guide instructional planning. The school establishes classroom culture that encourages interaction and use of assessment tools. The school also establishes learning goals and tracks individual student progress toward those goals. In addition, the school uses varied instructional methods to meet diverse student needs (small group instruction, one-to-one instruction, work with a buddy, and teaching in tiers) and uses varied approaches to assess student understanding. The school also makes sure to have feedback on student performance and adapt instruction to meet identified needs, and stresses the importance of the active involvement of students in the learning process. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? P.S. 44 uses a set of summative assessments throughout the school year to identify baseline, progress and areas of need for all the students in the school as well as for our ELLs. These summative and baseline/benchmark assessments include ReadyGen Baseline Assessment which is administered in September. The ReadyGen End of Unit Assessment/Performance task is administered at the end of each unit for ELA. The school also administers MOSL: NYC ELA Performance Assessment Baseline in October and NYC ELA Performance Assessment (End of Year) in May. For math, P.S. 44 administers Go Math Beginning of the Year Exam/Diagnostic, followed by Go Math Unit Assessment and Performance Task at the end of each unit. At the end of the school year P.S. 44 administers Go Math End of Year Assessment. Other summative assessments that the school administers are NYSESLAT, which is administered in April/May for all ELLs. ELA State Test is administered in April, Math State Test is administered in May and 4th grade Science Test is administered in June 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data have been gathered, they are used to inform instruction and the academic interventions students will get based on their performance. P.S. 44 has small class sizes where all students receive the attention and support they need. In grades K-5 ICT classes have 2 teachers who work collaboratively to address the needs of the general education students, special education students and ELLs. The ENL teacher works collaboratively with classroom teachers through the push-in, pull-out models in order to support ELLs. Students who are far below average receive small group instruction, and if still need assistance, they receive one-to-one instruction. Working in Tiers is also determined by the data obtained from summative assessments as well as formative assessment. Choosing student groups, size of the group, creating seating charts and differentiation for individuals are all based on the data reveled by the summative assessments. The RTI is followed based on students’ performance and both the classroom teachers and ENL teacher work collaboratively to address the needs of the students in all content areas. ENL/ESL strategies are used to support ELLs and additional instruction and practice on areas of need is provided in order to make sure students have mastered skills they earlier lacked. 4  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The Response to Intervention (RTI) model is one which focuses on prevention and early intervention should a student be struggling. There are 3 tiers of intervention beginning with Tier 1. This is based on the core curriculum in which targeted and differentiated instruction is available to all students in a general education classroom. If a student needs additional support, he/she is moved to the Tier 2 and later Tier 3 levels. These tiers provide more instructional support through small group instruction, Academic Intervention Services or other interventions. As the student progresses and this progress is measured through a variety of assessments, the additional academic supports are removed. If data shows that a student is not thriving academically, the general education as well as ENL teachers will meet in order to discuss differentiated instruction that can be put into place to allow the student better access to the curriculum. The ENL teacher also supports the classroom teacher’s instruction during ENL pull-out services. If an ELL is performing on level 1 or 2, the student is moved to Tier 2 of the RTI framework. The types of programs or strategies used for Tier 11 students are: Ready Gen, Good Habits/Good Readers, Guided Reading, Shared Reading, Interactive Reading and Writing, Increasing volume through on demand writing and use of writing prompts. Tier 1 students are given additional support daily in the classroom in the following manner: individual conferences, one-on-one guided support/coaching sessions, UDL and RTI, infusing technology and visual supports, in addition to the ENL teacher support. This student receives additional after school as well as Saturday Academy academic instruction. Small-group, targeted instruction is put in place in order to help the student succeed. ELLs who received a Commanding on the NYSESLAT (May 2014 and 2015) will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL weekly as per the new CR Part 154 mandates. The classroom teacher continues to differentiate instruction to meet the newly proficient students' needs. They are also given the opportunity to attend all after school programs. They are entitled to ELL testing accommodations for two years after they achieve proficiency on the NYSESLAT. For grades k-3, P.S. 44 determines the eligibility to receive AIS is by local assessments including but not limited to ELP, Concepts About Print, Letter Identification, DRA, Running Records, Developmental Spelling Inventories, district writing rubrics, multiple measures, as defined by the grade level will provide a profile to use when consideration for AIS and the level of AIS support is being determined. Screening methods may include early literacy assessments, WADE, TOWL, Woodcock Reading Mastery Test, QRI, and Miscue Analysis as needed. Mathematics AIS will be determined by TERC and classroom assessments and daily class performance as observed and documented by the classroom teachers. Grade 2 and 3 will include observation and assessment by AIS math teacher. Within the RtI framework, formative and summative assessments are used to determine the need of student to move from Tier I instruction to Tier II or Tier II. They are also used to put students back to Tier I when their performance improves, and teachers based on students' scores in both formative and summative assessments indicate that the students can work within a whole group rather than a small one. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. P.S. 44 uses the information gathered from the ELL Data Analysis tool (EDAT) to evaluate and inform our ELL programs and to plan instruction and set goals for all our ELLs at the different levels of proficiency. The tool shows that there are 14 entitled ELLs in P.S 44, 12 of them took the NYSESLAT in 2017, and 2 new student who were identified as ELLs in September 2017. The new student s are at the Entering Level as per the scores of the NYSITELL. For 1st grade, 1 student is at the Entering Level and the other at the Transitioning Level. For 2nd grade, 1 students is at the Entering Level, 1 student at the Emerging Level and 3 students at the Expanding Level. For 3rd grade, 2 students at the the Expanding Level. For 4th grade, 1 special education ELL at the Entering Level. For 5th grade, 1 student is at the Entering Level and 1 student with IEP is at the Expanding Level. The tool also shows that 7 ELLs are At-Risk level 1, 1 5th grade student is At-Risk level 3, and 1 5th grade student with an IEP is At-Risk level 8. The above data in addition to other data obtained from RLAT report help in planning and informing instructions as what areas of concern needs to be dealt with. For example the 1st year 5th grade ELL receive home language support, and in the classroom is placed in a small group to get extra help. The other 5th grade also works in a small group in addition to receiving additional services as per her IEP. Students are always placed in small groups based on their proficiency level and needs, and 5  recieved the mandated ENL units. The EDAT also shows that ELLs in testing grades, 3,4 and 5 are not doing far behind the native English students. The NYSESLAT data shows that ELLs are making incremental gains on the assessment by annually moving forward to the next proficiency level on their way to becoming English language proficient. Many ELs come in on the Advanced level in kindergarten and test out of the program by the end of the first grade. For this reason, the majority of our ELLs are found in grades K-5. ELLs who are at the Entering level are all newcomers. The NYSITELL test results indicate that newly enrolled ELLs need the greatest amount of support in reading and writing. The NYSESLAT results indicate that the ENL/ESL teacher needs to focus on reading and writing at all grade levels. The general NYSESLAT scores are divided into modality aggregates. The NYSESLAT scores are analyzed according to the oral modality (listening/speaking) and the written modality (reading/writing). Five proficiency levels are included: Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding. Each student's score is reported in both the oral and the written modality. It is common for a student to have different proficiencies in each modality, and accordingly, instruction is planned and students are grouped. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Once these findings become available, they are shared among the ESL/ENL teacher, the classroom teachers and administration. During consecutive grades planning meetings, classroom teachers who have ELLs in their classes are provided with a summary of the ELLs performance in the Listening/Speaking and Reading/Writing modalities. They are also provided with ELL Data Analysis Tool summary in order to better plan and differentiate their instruction while working with the ELLs. The ENL/ESL teacher also used these data to inform his instruction. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. There is a Freestanding ENL Program at P.S. 44. Integrated ENL instruction for varied proficiency levels is provided by the ENL/ESL teacher and the general education teachers. Teachers plan lessons and ENL methodologies and techniques are utilized to support the language acquisition needs of the ELLs. Students are grouped by grade levels and mixed proficiency levels when there are two or more students in that grade or two contiguous grade levels. For the integrated model, the ENL teacher plans ahead with the classroom teacher and pushes in to service the ELLs in the classroom during Math, science, or social studies sessions. As the ENL teacher is dual certified, he also pulls-out the ELLS for the integrated model so that the students can work in small groups of 2 or 3. For the stand-alone model, the ENL teacher pulls-out the ELLs and work with them on certain task based on prior planning with homeroom teachers. According to CRP154.2 ELLs at the entering level receive 2 units of mandated ENL service, one in the stand-alone ENL model, and one in the integrated model. ELLs at the Emerging level receive 2 units of ENL service, 0.5 unit in stand-alone ENL, 1 unit in integrated ENL/ELA and 0.5 unit of stand-alone ENL or integrated ENL/ELA/Content Area. ELLs at the Transitioning level receive 1 unit of mandated service, 0.5 unit of integrated ENL in ENL/ELA and 0.5 unit of stand-alone ENL or integrated ENL/ELA/Content Area. ELLs at the Expanding receive 1 unit of mandated service, in the integrated model in ENL/ELA or other content areas. Former ELLs (Commanding Level) receive 0.5 unit of study per week of integrated ENL, in ELA or Content Areas, or other approved services. b. TBE program. If applicable. P.S. 44 does not have a TBE program. 6  c. DL program. If applicable. P.S. 44 does not have a Dual Language program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Entering and Emerging level students receive 360 minutes of ENL per week, 180 of which are Stand-Alone ENL and the other 180 Integrated ENL. Transitioning students receive 180 minutes of ENL, 90 which are Stand-Alone and 90 Integrated ENL. Expanding students receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL. Former, or Commanding, ELLs will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL. A full-time ENL/ESL teacher creates the ENL schedule to meet the mandated minutes for each student. Native language support is provided when appropriate and possible. Bilingual books are available to students to read in the ENL classroom. During the stand-alone sessions, the ENL teacher delivers the ENL and ELA in small groups of 2-3 students based on their needs and based on prior planning with the homeroom teacher. Half of the mandated minutes are done in that model, and ELLs received more minutes as they are not pulled from ELA sessions all the time. The ENL teacher is dual certified, and after planning with the classroom teacher, he is able to deliver both the ENL and ELA sessions. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The classroom teacher provides instruction in the content areas using ENL methodologies and native language support. The teachers scaffold the lessons with modeling, visual and dramatized contextual support, Total Physical Response (TPR) and linguistic structure. Beyond explicit ENL, collaboration between teachers means that there is a consideration for the language needs of ELLs. During the integrated ENL and ENL flexibility model, the ENL teacher work inside the classroom with the classroom teacher to support ELLs in content areas such as math, science, ELA, and social studies. The ENL/ESL teacher collaborates with teachers to review student data and work to inform instruction. Content area support is provided by the ENL/ESL teacher using scaffolding strategies, use of authentic literature, small group instruction and language acquisition explicit and implicit strategies.Some aspects of this policy include:- Content area teachers monitor the understanding of linguistically challenging materials and use a variety of phrasings and synonyms to clarify meaning.- Math teachers devote extra class time to untangling difficult word problems, and require students to make verbal explanations of the problems they work on.- Social studies teachers scaffold their instruction with visual aids such as maps, atlases, and illustrations to increase comprehension.At levels above the emerging level, sheltered English instruction is used by all homeroom and content area teachers as a way to make content comprehensible for the English language learners. Teachers do their best to use clear, direct, simple English and a wide range of scaffolding strategies to communicate meaningful input in the content area to students. Learning activities that connect new content to students' prior knowledge, that require collaboration among students, and that spiral through curriculum material, offer ELLs the grade-level content instruction of their English-speaking peers, while adapting lesson delivery to suit their English proficiency level. For ELLs at the beginner/entering level, direct and explicit ENL instruction is offered by the ENL/ESL teacher to help them acquire the basic skills of English they need. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Almost all our ELLs are not literate in their home languages. One ELL who joined the U.S. school system in 4th grade is a SIFE, and he speaks Arabic, the same language our ENL teacher speaks. The ENL teacher uses different online materials to assess the student, but since he is a SIFE, he cannot read or write in his native language. The evaluation is always verbal. The majority of the other ELLs 10/14 speak very little words and sentences in their home languages, but neither read or write those languages. The ENL/ESL teacher has a bilingual library in the classroom. Throughout the year, students will be asked to read a native language book on their reading level and summarize the book orally or in writing. In addition, pedagogues who speak another language assist in the evaluation of students with the same home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 7  SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFEs are students with interrupted, little or no formal education who are at least 2 academic years behind their age group. We currently have 1 student who is SIFE. Our plan for SIFEs is to provide academic intervention services as an extension of the regular school program with both push-in and pull-out services. This student works most of the time with the ENL teacher who speaks the same home language and who is dual certified. He is pulled out 4 times a week, and the teacher pushes in to work with him during the integrated model 4 times a week. Prior to servicing the student, different plans are made to meet the students needs. These include:- Making an individualized student need s assessment.- Creation of an AIS plan for the student with a focus on the literacy and math components.- Grade appropriate instructional support materials.- Differentiation of instruction in all areas.- Encourage students to participate in after-school native literacy program... b. When a newcomer is registered in our school, we provide the following resources to facilitate the transition.- An informal student orientation.- Buddy system: Identifying a similar student in his/her class that will assist during the school day.- An informal assessment is provided to identify possible Academic Intervention Services.- Home/School communication.- Afters-chool services to provide small group instruction.- Native language support.- Saturday Academy program for testing grades and students in lower grades who can benefit from this service.- Encourage students to participate in after-school native language literacy program. All new comers and based on their language proficiency level as revealed by the NYSITELL receive equal units of integrated and stand-alone ENL units. Based on availability, they also receive home language support by teachers who speak the same home language. c. Developing ELLs:- Small group and differentiated instruction in the classroom.- After-school instruction tailored to their needs.- Periodic assessments to monitor progress and drive instruction.- Encourage students to participate in an after-school program, targeting ELA and Math, with an emphasis on reading and writing.- Monitoring the progress of students in all content areas to differentiate instruction for literacy needs.- Saturday Academy program to enrich their language and academic skills. Developing ELLs receive more of ENL service in the classroom with other native English speaking students in the integrated model for 2 or 4 sessions a week based on their proficiency level, and equal sessions in the stand-alone model. d. Long terms ELLs are ELLs who have been unable to achieve English proficiency on the NYSESLAT after their 6th year of ELL services. We currently do not have Long Term ELLs. Our future action plan for this group involves:- An after-school program targeting reading and writing.- Monitoring the progress of students in all content areas to differentiate instruction for literacy needs.- AIS support, in addition to ENL during day to enrich their language and academic skills e. Our policy for former ELLs (up to two years after exiting the ENL program) is: - 90 minutes of Integrated ENL study weekly- Communication between ENL/ESL teacher and classroom teachers to monitor former ELLs’ progress and academic standing.- Appropriate testing accommodations, including extra time and separate location for the first two years after testing proficient on the NYSESLAT. - After-school, as well as, Saturday Academy services in order to support ELA and math instruction. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELLs and SWDs use a variety of instructional strategies and grade-level materials that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development. These include: Scaffolding Understanding Scaffolding is often used with ELLs and SWD which include the use of graphic organizers, visual aids, peer help, or home language help. These means can be removed, as students’ skills develop. This way, ELLs and SWD can be given the opportunity and the necessary support to meet rigorous academic standards. Purposeful Grouping ELLs learn best when they are in heterogeneous classrooms. ELLs need to be given ample opportunities to have extended interaction (such as doing ‘jigsaw’-type activities) with peers of varying English proficiency levels, who can provide ELLs with a 8  range of models for how to use English words or structures appropriately, as well as abundant, personalized feedback on ELLs’ own developing English use. It is best for ELLs if, within their classrooms, teachers sometimes group students heterogeneously according to English proficiency, and sometimes homogeneously, depending on the purpose of the task at hand. SWD also benefit from being in heterogeneous groups, by placing them in the least restrictive environment such as ICT classes. Background Knowledge Another teaching technique that is beneficial for ELLs, is to provide them with relevant background knowledge about a topic to be discussed in class, or activate their existing knowledge of a topic. Besides increasing student interest, this allows students to focus more fully on the instructional goals, rather than being overwhelmed with too much new information at once. It also allows ELLs to bridge new knowledge to old knowledge, increasing understanding, and it helps some ELLs fill in contextual information that they may not have due to coming from different cultural backgrounds. Extended Discussion Though teachers have generally attempted to teach ELLs difficult vocabulary before having them read texts, ELLs learn new vocabulary best through extended discussion with their classmates after reading or between multiple readings. Valuing Linguistic Differences Schools and teachers can help ELLs greatly by learning about ELLs’ home cultures and languages, treating cultural and linguistic differences as resources rather than obstacles, and reaching out to students’ homes and communities to build learning opportunities together. In addition the following strategies are also used:- Breaking objectives down into smaller steps.- Simplifying directions to ensure that the students understand what is to be done.- Presenting material, directions and information using multiple modalities: visual, auditory, and tactile or kinesthetic if possible and appropriate.- Use of TPR (Total Physical Response) techniques.- Use of Guided Reading for a-risk-students.- Use of leveled libraries to present content area materials on the reading level appropriate for the student. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? P.S. 44 exercises curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility in order to meet the diverse needs of ELLs and SWDs within the least restrictive environment. Based on the needs of the ELLs and SWD, ENL teacher and service providers plan their schedule so that there in clashes while offering the services to students who might be serviced by the both teachers. In addition, since physical education is important to students at that age, we avoid scheduling sessions to ELLs of SWDs during these periods. The school makes all possible efforts to meet the needs of these students through:- Matching grade appropriate material to the student’s reading level to ensure access to grade-level curriculum.- Teachers will supplement the regular curriculum with extra materials as needed in order to meet the needs of all learners.- Related Services Provider as, as well as, the EN/ESLL teacher will use a combination of the push-in/pull-out models of instruction depending ng on the needs of the students.- Related services providers and the ENL/ESL teacher will collaborate with the classroom teachers in order to align instruction for the students. Except for one ELL-SWDs, all our ELLs are serviced in the least restricted environment. This student, as per his IEP plan, needs to services in 12:1:1; however, during the ENL sessions he is pulled-out and works in small group of 2-3 students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention services for ELL students are provided primarily in English with home language support when available. Interventions in ELA include: Headsprout (K-2); Reading A-Z, Raz, Raz-Kids, Writing A-Z, Vocabulary A-Z, and Raz ELL Edition. For math ELLs use Prodigy Game, I Know it and Ten Marks. These program are interactive online programs which help students to be actively engaged and in the meantime give the teacher the ability to track students’ progress. Science and social studies intervention take place during engaging lessons using home language support, manipulatives and hands-on experiences. Need is determined by data from assessment exams in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies, the NYS ELA exams, NYS Math exams, the NYSESLAT, teacher observation and evaluation of student work. Instruction is in English with home language support in all content areas. 9  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The following improvements will be made for the coming school year:- Continued increase in alignment to the Common Core State Standards.- The introduction of the National Geographic Research program in the Stand-Alone ENL program.- Making non-fiction texts the focus in the reading program in order to prepare ELLs for content-area reading and writing that they will encounter in their general education classrooms.- Related Service Providers and the EN/ESL teacher will collaborate with the classroom teachers in order to align instruction and therefore creates a web of support for the students. - Interactive online programs and the use of technology in the classrooms will be a focus since they proved to be effective with all students including ELLs and SWDs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? P.S. 44 does have bilingual programs and so no programs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Any programs available to monolingual students in the school are also available to ELLs. P.S.44 has several partnerships which enrich the lives of our students including Material for the Arts. Instrumental music, Engineering and Math (STEM) as well as Society of the Educational Arts (SEA) are also supplemental services offered during school hours. ELLs are also encouraged to participate in extracurricular activities. P.S. 44 offers an After-School Enrichment program for all students. The program offerings include: drama, chorus, track and field, basketball, and swimming for all students in grade 2. Saturday Academy provides additional academic support for students.- Spanish-speaking pedagogues call the parents of ELLs to encourage ELL participation in after-school programs.- Family Celebrations: Throughout the year, parents com to the school to take part in community celebrations including the Marcus Garvey Feast, Craft Night, Career Night, Spirit Week and Black History Month Celebration. At these events, the school and community can come together to recognize student achievements in arts and academics.- Translation and Interpretation Services: These services are offered to increase the involvement of limited English proficiency parents. The DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit is utilized for on the phone interpretation during the school day, and an approved contractor is appointed for other times when interpretation is needed. The school will have one after-school program which will offer additional help to students to improve their reading skills. The program will be for 2 hours every Wednesday and Thursday, and will start in November and end in May. In addition, the school starts a Saturday Academy to help students get ready for state test. The academy starts in February and ends in late April/early May. If offers test strategies to help students deal with test questions especially those who take standardized tests for the first time. All ELLs will be encouraged to join the reading after-school programs, and ELLs in grades 3, 4 and 5 will join the Saturday Academy. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. In order to ensure that all ELLs are held to the same high expectations established in the Common Core Standards, ELLs are given the same learning opportunities and the same quality instructional materials the mainstream students use. The instructional materials that are used are appropriate for teaching ENL and are sensitive to the language and culture of the students. Along with using the "Common Core ELA Standards" and "The Teaching of Language Arts to Limited English Proficient/English Language Learners: Learning Standards for ESL," the ENL/ESL teacher integrates and scaffolds skills and strategies in the Reading and Writing curricula. An array of materials, both print and non-print, on a variety of levels are used. Leveled classroom libraries, genre based libraries, content based libraries (baskets for math, science and social studies), and computer based programs allow for differentiated instruction. During after-school, students performing at levels 1 and 2 on the NYS ELA or Math assessments use materials which specifically target the areas in which help is most needed. In ENL, students have access to such websites as www.starfall.com, www.pbskids.org and www.britishcouncil.org/kids. The Reading Eggs program, an interactive online program which supports each child’s learning by offering individual, one-on-one lessons that allow children to progress at their own rate, was purchased for use by the ENL program. This program focuses on a core 0  reading curriculum of phonics and sight words using skills and strategies essential for sustained reading success. In the ELA program, Ready Gen as well as Good Habits: Great Readers, a guided reading program, are used.Go Math, as well as exemplar performance tasks, are used for mathematics. Additionally ELLs, if literate in their native language, are provided with word-to-word glossaries for use in the content areas. Materials for Science include Harcourt. Students are engaged in hands-on scientific exploration in classrooms and with a science cluster teacher. Students also have access to non-fiction science libraries. Materials for Social Studies include Harcourt as well as trade books, primary source documents and word to word glossaries for students literate in their native languages. Students have access to non-fiction texts in their classroom libraries. The Freestanding ENL program has begun using the National Geographic Reach program. Students performing at level 1 and 2 in literacy receive targeted reading instruction. Students who are emergent/beginner readers or have difficulty decoding use Foundations as well as Month-by-Month Reading and Writing. The school has a computer lab, as well as, laptops and i-pads. In addition to websites that that offer practice in ENL/ESL, the reading afterschool program will heavily be based on software and online subscriptions to programs such as Headsprout, Vocabulary A-Z, Writing A-Z, Ready Test A-Z, Science A-Z and Raz-Plus. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? P.S. 44 does not have any DL or TBE programs. Most of our students are not fluent in their home language , and therefore home language support is only offered to those who speak and understand their home language. We have 2 students who are fluent in their home language verbally, and the ENL teacher who speaks the same home language offers assistance during ENL sessions. This assistance includes explaining some lessons in Arabic, or a mix between English and Arabic, and oral translation during state test for content area tests . Although the classroom and ENL/ESL teachers only use English for instruction, the students are provided native language support when the goal of the instruction is for the student to understand a concept or strategy. Classroom teachers who speak the native language are encouraged to provide native language support to their ELLs whenever appropriate and possible. English is used for instruction when language acquisition is the target. For example, when it important that the student understands the literacy skill to pay attention to how the character feels, the student is provided with a translation. However, when the goal is for the student to acquire the vocabulary of character feelings, instruction is provided in English and supported with visual diagrams or dramatic contextualization. Additionally, the students will express themselves in the language that would best support the lesson goal. For example, when the target is reading or writing stamina, the student will read or write in the language in which they can be most independent. However, when the task is to talk about their favorite part of a Read Aloud, they will listen to their English proficient partners modeling dialogue and reuse the language structures to express themselves in English, or may have accountable talk with a classmate who shares the same home language. Other native language supports include a bilingual library in the ENL classroom, bilingual dictionaries and use of a buddy system in which one student is able to translate information into the home language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Since support and resources take place in the ELLs’ classrooms, both support and resources correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. When ELLs are serviced in the ENL classroom, the teacher abides by the ELA Common Core Standards as well as the ENL Standards for the appropriate grade level as well as collaborates with the classroom teachers in order to support the students in their areas of highest need. We recognize that it is very appropriate to have grade appropriate content for any level reader of every age. We have High-Interest Low-Level libraries in every classroom. When planning for an activity, purchasing new resources, and offering a service, teachers review the language profeciency levels of all students in the school, ELLs, SWD and general education students to make sure that each of these item correspond to the ELL’s ages and grade levels in general and ELL-SWD in particular. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our School shares the building with the Unity Charter School. Each school has its own facilities to use; however, we share the library, the lunch room, Gym, and the playground. Administration in both schools have worked out a schedule so that each school can use the facilities to get the maximum benefits for their students. In order to ensure that all ELLs are held to the same high expectations established in the Common Core Standards, ELLs are given the same learning opportunities and the same quality instructional materials the mainstream students use in addition to the ENL service and additional support tailored 1  for them based on their language proficiency. The instructional materials that are used are appropriate for teaching ENL and are sensitive to the language and culture of the students. Along with using the "Common Core ELA Standards" and "The Teaching of Language Arts to Limited English Proficient/English Language Learners: Learning Standards for ESL," the ENL/ESL teacher integrates and scaffolds skills and strategies in the Reading and Writing curricula. An array of materials, both print and non-print, on a variety of levels is used. Leveled classroom libraries, genre based libraries, content based libraries (baskets for math, science and social studies), and computer based programs allow for differentiated instruction. During after-school, students performing at levels 1 and 2 on the NYS ELA or Math assessments use materials which specifically target the areas in which help is most needed. In ENL, students have access to such websites as www.starfall.com, www.pbskids.org and www.britishcouncil.org/kids. The Reading Eggs program, an interactive online program which supports each child’s learning by offering individual, one-on-one lessons that allow children to progress at their own rate, was purchased for use by the ENL program. This program focuses on a core reading curriculum of phonics and sight words using skills and strategies essential for sustained reading success. In the ELA program, Ready Gen as well as Good Habits: Great Readers, a guided reading program, are used.Go Math, as well as exemplar performance tasks, is used for mathematics. Additionally ELLs, if literate in their native language, are provided with word-to-word glossaries for use in the content areas. Materials for Science include Harcourt. Students are engaged in hands-on scientific exploration (STEM) in classrooms and with a science cluster teacher. Students also have access to non-fiction science libraries. Materials for Social Studies include Harcourt as well as trade books, primary source documents and word to word glossaries for students literate in their native languages. Students have access to non-fiction texts in their classroom libraries. The Freestanding ENL program has begun using the National Geographic Reach program. Students performing at level 1 and 2 in literacy receive targeted reading instruction. Students who are emergent/beginner readers or have difficulty decoding use Foundations as well as Month-by-Month Reading and Writing. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). When students are registered over the summer, a staff member takes the family on a tour of the building and has an informal orientation touching on topics such as school policies, school curriculum and expectations, school uniform and necessary supplies. The parent and student have the opportunity to ask questions and meet the teacher if he or she is present. During the school year, a newly enrolled ELL will have a buddy assigned to him/her who will ease the new student into the flow of the day as well as the culture of the school. This buddy system is set up by the ENL/ESL teacher in collaboration with the classroom teachers. The school staff who are involved in that process include, but not limited to, the school principal, the assistant principal, the school secretary, the parent coordinator, and the ENL teacher. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? No language electives are offered. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2  Workshops taken by ENL/bilingual teachers, as well as teachers who teach ELLs include: - Series of ELA workshops and classroom assistance by an ELA staff developer on the effective use of ReadyGen in the classroom - Series of Math workshops and classroom assistance by a math staff developer on the effective use of Go Math, Exemplar, and math talk.- Integrating STEM across the School Community. This workshop aims at helping all teachers at the school to be able to integrate STEM into their lessons, and help all students including ELLs to gain important scientific concepts and skills. (All teachers working with ELLs and non-ELLs)- Integrated Curriculum Planning. This PD aims at equipping all teachers with necessary skills to plan their instruction and integrate both STEM and ENL concepts in their instruction (All teachers working with ELLs and non-ELLs)- Close Reading. This PD aims at training teachers to use different strategies on using close reading as a way of improving students' reading comprehension skills. (All teachers working with ELLs and non-ELLs)- The Essentials of Conferring with Young Writers (All teachers working with ELLs and non-ELLs)- Universal Design for Learning (All teachers working with ELLs and non-ELLs)- Project Based Learning/Enhancing Social Studies Curriculum through the Arts- Teaching Academic Vocabulary for ELLs. This PD aims at equipping teachers of ELLs with new strategies that can help them better teaching vocabulary to ELLs. (Teachers of ELLs, ENL and bilingual teachers)- Boost Vocabulary Acquisition for ELLs. This PD aims at equipping teachers of ELLs with new strategies that can help them better teaching vocabulary to ELLs. (Teachers of ELLs, ENL and bilingual teachers)- Introduction to the ESL Sheltered Instruction Model. This PD aims at providing teachers of ELLs with tools and strategies to place their ELLs in the classroom with non-ELLs and provide them high quality teaching that meet their needs. (Teachers of ELLs).- Differentiation to accommodate ELLs in the General Education Classroom . (Teachers of ELLs).- ELLs and Special Needs Students. This PD aims at helping teachers to know the difference between ELLS and disability that may delay language acquisition and development . (Teachers of ELLs).- Daily Vocabulary & Students Lead Discussions (All teachers including teachers of ELLS).- RTI for ELLs (All teachers including teachers of ELLS).- Research-based Pathways to CCLS for ELLs (All teachers including teachers of ELLS).- Common Core Literacy (All teachers including teachers of ELLS).- Getting to the Core: Differentiating Instruction for English Language Learners (teachers of ELLS). 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In order to meet the professional development requirements as per CR 154.2, the school prepares a professional development plan for the sessions that will be held in the school during the year. In that plan, 15% of the total hours of these sessions will be dealing with ELL-specific topics, and all teachers will have to attend these sessions. As we have only one ENL/ESL teacher in the school, Mr. Maksoud, will be getting the remaining 35% of the 50% requirement of ELL-specific professional development through attending PD sessions offered by North Brooklyn Support Field Office, The Division of English Language Learners & Student Support, NYC UFT and other institutions, universities, colleges and schools offering professional development session in that field. Records of all the professional development sessions completed in the school including agendas and attendance sheets are kept in the Principal's office. Teachers who attend professional developments to maintain their licenses (100 hours/5 years) are made aware of the new changes in CR 154.2, (15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teacher receive ELL-specific professional development) and submit a copy of the agendas of the professional developments they attend in the approved institutions that offer such PDs. These copies are also kept in the professional development folder in the Principal's office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 3  During the first week of October, the school will prepare a schedule for meeting ELL parents individually twice a year, once during the period of October - January, and the second during February - June, in order to discuss the goals of the program the child is in, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Under the teacher contract, Tuesday afternoons are scheduled as parent meeting times, and most of the meetings will take place during that time. Meetings, if scheduled beforehand, can be held at other times during the week if the Tuesday time is not convenient to the parent/guardian. The ENL/ESL teacher has an open door policy and parents can stop by before or after school throughout the year to discuss any concerns and ask questions. The meeting will include school staff necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language development in all content areas and in the English language. Translation will be provided either by a bilingual teacher or by a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. During these meetings the teachers of ELLs and the ENL teacher provide parents with detailed explanations of the goals of the school programs and the ENL program provided at the school. The school uses the EDAT tool to create Student Summary Report with descriptions, Full Student Reports with details and NYSESLAT Analysis and Summary of the ELLs who were at the school during the previous school year in order to inform the parents about the progress their children achieved and what are the present and future goals. EDAT reports that compares ELLS performance in NYSESLAT with ELA, math and science are used to provide additional information about the ELLs performance in all content areas. In addition to the above mentioned meetings, parents are always welcomed to attend their children classroom, such as during parents as reading partners, and parents as math partners, coffee with the principal and other school events including music nights, movie nights and end of year festival. All parents of ELLs are invited and encouraged to attend and share with the school any concerns or areas of interest. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The Principal as well as the Parent Coordinator organize a myriad of workshops for parents throughout the year such as “Parents as Math Partners,” "Parents as Reading Partners," “CCLS Expectations,” as well as test-prep workshops. Parent Orientation Workshops are offered to all parents in September, and ELLs parent orientation sessions are held the second week of September and throughout the school year to the parents of newly admitted ELLs. At these workshops and orientation sessions the school uniform policy, monthly calendars and all activities are explained to the parents. There is a questions and answers period available after the workshops. Translation is always available for parents in commonly spoken languages among the parents of our ELLs. The Principal and Parent Coordinator also offer extended series workshops for parents including the Nutrition Workshop in partnership with Cornell University after which parents graduated with a certificate, technology workshops, as well as a HIV/Aids Awareness workshop after which parents also graduated with certificates. Parents are invited to be active participants in their children’s education through monthly newsletters. Teachers hold curriculum orientations and translators are made available for parents requesting the services. Parents are welcome to volunteer in the classroom. The involvement of the parents and the family in the study and school activities of their children is very important for many reasons. Research has shown that family participation in education was twice as predictive of students’ academic success as family socioeconomic status. It has also shown that the more intensely parents are involved, the more beneficial the achievement effects and the higher grades, test scores, and graduation rates the students achieve. Moreover, this results in better school attendance, increased motivation, better self-esteem, lower rates of suspension and fewer instances of violent behavior. The Principal, Ms. James, also has monthly Town Hall meetings, Parents as Reading/Math Partners and Coffee With the Principal, to keep parents abreast of school news and addresses any concerns the parents may have. PTA meetings and SLT meetings are held monthly to share vital information and to discuss the school's progress, and to plan next steps. There are also many fun activities for families throughout the year which boost school spirit and create a sense of community with the school. These include Craft Night, movie nights as well as a Parent Social. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. All our ELLs are encouraged to participate in the Extra-curricular activities that take place in the school. Of our 14 ELLs, 3 of them usually paricipate in the chorus and band team that practices every Friday from 9:00 to 10:30. They also perform with their team mates twice a year, once during December and once during May/June. One of our 3 grade ELLs participates in the school basketball team since he was in 2nd grade, and has played with the team in all the tournaments they played. All our ELLs participate in the 4  Arts program, offered every Tuesday, and learn how to draw and use colors, and their drawings are displayed at the May parent night that is attended by all parents including parents of ELLs. They are also participating in the coding program offered at the school, and learn how to use either computers, laptops or i-pads to code. 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Roxanne James, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Marcus Garvey School DBN: 13K044 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Roxanne James Title Principal Nichele Holder Assistant Principal Cheryl Williams Parent Coordinator Nabil Abdel Maksoud ENL/Bilingual Teacher Stephanie Dodson Parent Ana Vedrine Teacher/Subject Area Marsha Pierre Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Joyce Wingfield 1/1/01 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 13K044 School Name: Marcus Garvey Superintendent: Barbara Freeman The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Nabil Abdel Maksoud Teacher yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. All parents/guardians of newly enrolled students fill out a Home Language Survey when enrolling their child. This form is maintained as part of the student’s record. If the parent/guardian indicates on the HLIS that they would like to receive information from the school in their home language, forms being sent home are translated either in written form or orally to the parent/guardian. Information from teachers is translated to parents by staff members who speak the home language. There are currently 16 ELLs at P.S.44. One parent has requested information to be sent in Bengali. Otherwise, no other parents have requested information to be sent home in a language other than English. However, the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit will be utilized if a parent/guardian should request these services. This was indicated on the HLIS as well as confirmed orally by a pedagogue who speaks the parents' home language. During parent orientation, the parents provide requests for language preference and they document their language preference on the emergency contact cards. Parent surveys are distributed in Bengali, the language requested, as well as English which has been requested by the parents. The ATS Report of Preferred Languages is updated regularly in order to maintain accurate information on parent language choices ( RAPO ATS Report). Parent Blue Cards are also updated regularly to keep parent 8  language choices current. Parent surveys are given out by the parent coordinator in order to maintain accurate data on parent language choices. Teachers also send home surveys by backpack or during parent conferences in order to collect parent data by class/grade. A report is generated using a variety of data sets in order to regularly update the languages that parents speak by class and/or grade. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ENGLISH SPANISH ARABIC CHINESE ANY BENGALI FRENCH 120 87.59 120 4 7 2 2 1 2.92 5.11 1.46 1.46 0.73 4 7 2 2 1 87.59 2.92 5.11 1.46 1.46 0.73 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include Families procedures to ensure timely provision of Annual Handbook September translated documents to parents. The school gets the Annual Handbook ready for the next school year by June, and then e-mail it to the NYC DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit to be translated to languages read by parents in our school and the T&I Units offers translation for. If translation for languages not offered by T&I Unit is required, The Big Word, an approved external translation vendor is reached. It is estimated that translation will be ready 9  parent-teacher conference announcements September, November, March, May ELL parent orientation/ information letters Throughout school year curriculum overview September NYSESLAT testing notification March ELL entitlement and non-entitlement letters, Home Language Survey, Parent Program Choice Throughout school year by end of August, and ready to be distributed to parents early in September. The school already has translated announcements for parent teacher conferences. Dates might only need to changed, If major changes are required, the school will email the announcements that need to translated to the T&I Unit at least a month before the due date of distributing them. If translation for languages not offered by T&I Unit is required, The Big Word, an approved external translation vendor is reached at least a month before the due date of distributing them. The Translation and Interpretation Unit has made ELL parent orientation/information letters available in all the 5 foreign languages read by parents of our students. If translation for languages not offered by T&I Unit is required, The Big Word, an approved external translation vendor is reached at least a month before the due date of distributing them. P.S. 44 will get the curriculum overview ready by June,and send it to the T&I U for translation into the 5 foreign languages read by parents in our school. If translation for languages not offered by T&I Unit is required, The Big Word, an approved external translation vendor is reached at least a month before the due date of distributing them. Translation to NYSESLAT testing notifications is available from the T&I U in 9 languages, among which are the 5 foreign languages read by non native speaker parents of our ELLs. If translation for languages not offered by T&I Unit is required, The Big Word, an approved external translation vendor is reached at least a month before the due date of distributing them. Translation to all these forms are available from the T&I U in 9 languages, among which are the 5 foreign languages 0  After school program information December Letters from school leadership to parents Throughout school year read by non native speaker parents of our ELLs. If translation for languages not offered by T&I Unit is required, The Big Word, an approved external translation vendor is reached at least a month before the due date of distributing them. P.S. 44 will reach to the T&I U for translation of this information into the 5 foreign languages in November. available from the T&I U in 9 languages, among which are the 5 foreign languages read by non native speaker parents of our ELLs. If translation for languages not offered by T&I Unit is required, The Big Word, an approved external translation vendor is reached at least a month before the due date of distributing them. P.S. 44 will plan ahead so any letter from school leadership needs to be sent fo parents is translated by the T&I U. To do that, the letters will be ready and sent to T&I U at least a month before the due date of distribution. available from the T&I U in 9 languages, among which are the 5 foreign languages read by non native speaker parents of our ELLs. If translation for languages not offered by T&I Unit is required, The Big Word, an approved external translation vendor is reached at least a month before the due date of distributing them. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum Night September interpretation service(s)? Based on past events, pre-registration information or by using home language survey data, the school pre-assesses which languages will need interpretation. The school contacts the “Big Word”, the approved vendor, and makes the necessary arrangements for interpretation into Spanish, Bengali, Chinese and French. The cost will cover from the Translation and Interpretation Budget. The school has 1  Parent-Teacher Conferences November and March Parent Night May a bilingual teacher who will interpret to Arabic speaking parents. Based on past events, pre-registration information or by using home language survey data, the school pre-assesses which languages will need interpretation. The school contacts the “Big Word”, the approved vendor, and makes the necessary arrangements for interpretation into Spanish, Bengali, Chinese and French. The cost will cover from the Translation and Interpretation Budget. The school has a bilingual teacher who will interpret to Arabic speaking parents. Based on past events, pre-registration information or by using home language survey data, the school pre-assesses which languages will need interpretation. The school contacts the “Big Word”, the approved vendor, and makes the necessary arrangements for interpretation into Spanish, Bengali, Chinese and French. The cost will cover from the Translation and Interpretation Budget. The school has a bilingual teacher who will interpret to Arabic speaking parents. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, the school will reach limited-English-proficient families through an over the phone translation service offered by the Translation and Interpretation Unit. If one message needs to be delivered to all the parents in the school, the school will request an oral interpretation to that message to all the five foreign languages spoken by limited English-proficient families. Then this message will be recorded, with the original English message and phone calls are made to deliver the message. If the message is to be delivered to one parent only, that parent will be called on the phone through over the phone interpretation from the T&I U. If more information is needed, parents are welcome to come to the school and have more details through over the phone interpretation. In each cases, a letter to parents and families will be written and translated and sent to the limited-English-proficient families to give more details about the emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2  The Language Access Coordinator, who has received training, will turn key the information he learned during one or more the Monday 2:40 - 4:00 professional development sessions. He will explain to the them the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663, and access the Translation and Interpretation Unite for written translation and over the phone oral interpretation. In order to meet compliance, the school will provide all parents with the "I Speak........" Brochure during the Curriculum Night in September. Teachers will be provided with additional copies of that brochure to use if they have parents who are limited-English-proficient. Teachers will also be provided with the phone number they need to call in case they require over the phone interpretation. Parents will also provided with the "Parents' Bill of Rights" to inform them about their rights in obtaining written and oral translations in their languages. The school also mounts a large poster at the main entrance and in the main office informing parents that translation and interpretation are available in the school their languages. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) P.S. 44 has a multilingual welcome poster hanging in the main entrance to the school building so that everyone that enters the building is aware of language assistance services. Language I.D. guides are kept in at the security office as well as the main office. Information for parents on the N.Y.C.D.O. E.'s translation and interpretation services are available in 10 languages, and is kept at the security desk and main office. Parents' Bill of Rights are sent to the school is a variety of languages and they are distributed upon arrival to all parents who have indicated a preferred language other than English. Here at P. S. 44 the school staff are aware of language assistance services provided by the school by using data ( ATS Reports, Blue Cards and Surveys), updated roster of bilingual staff and The Translation and Interpretation Unit Services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent surveys are distributed (Translated to the mostly spoken languages by parents) at the beginning of the year which gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. The ENL teacher also meets individually with all parents/guardians of ELLs and can then also ascertain the needs and concerns that they may have. After such meetings,the ENL teacher confers with the parent coordinator and/or the classroom teachers in order to discuss the needs of the parents/guardians and students. In order to gather feedback from parents, we are creating a focus group of multilingual and multicultural parents to discuss their needs and the needs of their children. We obtain these information to inform our practices in order to improve the quality and availability of services we provide to parents and students. 3 
