 19K089 School Name: P.S. 089 CYPRESS HILLS Principal: IRENE LEON   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Cypress Hills Community School 19K089 PreK-8 265 Warwick Street, Brooklyn, NY 11207 School Number (DBN): 19K089 718-964-1180 Phone Number: 718-964-1185 Fax: Irene Leon ILeon@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Irene Leon Rafael Castillo Carmen McKay Maria Jaya Aurora Perez na na Michelle Neugebauer District Information Geographical District: 19 Superintendent: Dr. Thomas McBryde Jr. Superintendent’s Office Address: 557 Pennsylvania Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11207 Superintendent’s Email Address: TMcbrydeJr@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-240-2700 Fax: 718-240-2741 Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Brooklyn North Executive Director: Bernadatte Fitzgerald Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201   Executive Director’s Email Address: BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 347-225-5119 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Irene Leon Rafael Castillo Carmen McKay Maria Jaya Aurora Perez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Michelle Neugebauer CBO Representative, if applicable Minerva Cabanas EudoceaMartinez Mercedes Cuapa Brandie Ferreira Christine Lee Neysha Colon Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Marleny Polanco Member/CBO Representative Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? We believe that regardless of the disparity in prior experiences and skills acquired, all children at the Cypress Hills Community School can be provided with opportunities to learn and gain an understanding of high content standards that will enable them to meet the rigorous goals set for them by the city and state of New York. We believe that language is a tool for learning, not merely a subject to be learned as in foreign language classes. Therefore, it should serve as a mechanism for thinking about everything in life, including math and science, and allow for high levels of metacognition, reflection and analyses.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Cypress Hills Community School (CHCS) is a small, community-based dual language school. It is led jointly by the Principal and a Parent Co-Director who consult regularly with the School Leadership Team, composed of parents, teachers, administrators, as well as members of the Cypress Hills Local Development Corporation (CHLDC), our partner community-based organization (CBO). Our vision is for all students to become fully bilingual and bicultural, to be deeply concerned about themselves and each other, their community, their environment and the world. We envision all students as independent decision makers who think critically and are lifelong learners. Currently 47% of students are classified as English language learners (ELLs) and 25% are students with disabilities (SWDs). The CHCS seeks to continuously increase student’s native language skills as they also learn English. For the English native speaker, the approach promotes the learning of Spanish as a second language thereby promoting bilingualism for all of its students. In order to support this belief, we provide instructional experiences that start with what children know and do in their everyday lives and help them acquire new skills that will allow them to broaden their learning. As a result, the school’s over-arching instructional goal is to meet individual student needs by supporting progress along the developmental continuum, in both English and Spanish, so that they may demonstrate adequate yearly progress. We accomplish this by: Developing student’s academic vocabulary through engaging learning activities that demonstrate thinking and problem solving : Our school has dedicated a tremendous amount of time learning the craft of fostering academic conversations in our students. Collaboratively, we researched the best ways to sustain academic discussions and common practices that support student talk, such as structured “turn and talks”, use of language stems and "number talks". Our common practices around academic conversations have provided teachers with the opportunity to develop similar habits throughout the grades with the goal of developing academic language in both English and Spanish. Building Teacher’s Leadership Capacity: Our school is grounded in the spirit of collaboration and reflection. We have expanded on this collaborative practice by opening our building to more educators and strengthening our learning through reflection and the revision of practice. We’ve leveraged the use of model teachers, grade level team leaders and school-based coaches to initiate new leadership roles such as the use of protocols to look at student work and the sharing of effective instructional programs and structures. In this capacity, staff has disseminated what they have learned in a series of organized Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) where model teachers and school based coaches facilitate looking at student work with a content focus. During these meetings, coaches, school leaders and staff, discuss the work, monitor its development and share feedback as to its impact on teacher effectiveness. Strengthening student’s social emotional learning competencies through Project C.A.R.E: Project C.A.R.E (Communication, Accountability, Respect and Effort), our social emotional learning (SEL) initiative, was collaboratively designed by parents, administrators, and students in order to promote a positive school climate and a culture that enables student learning. These core values guide practices and policies and provide a common language we, as a school community, have deemed necessary for fostering and maintaining a peaceful and productive environment. Evidence of exemplary organizational and instructional coherence that are reflective of these core values, are the following: weekly C.A.R.E. lessons, monthly community meetings, peer mediation program, 4Rs Program, HOUSE Advisory program for all middle school students. Adapting the Common Core Curriculum to meet the needs of all students: As a dual language school, it is necessary to adapt the common core curriculum, such as Expeditionary Learning and EngageNY, to allow students at all language acquisition levels, to be cognitively challenged in content and language development. Grade level teacher teams have created curriculum maps for both literacy and math in a shared Google drive that reflects a shared understanding of how students learn. These are further reflected in the school’s core values in literacy and math. Strengthening Parent Engagement in the CCLS: It is critical that we support our families in understanding the demands of the new curriculum so that we may work as partners in meeting the academic and social-emotional needs of the children. This is accomplished through the following family initiatives: curriculum nights (math, ELA, 0  science, early childhood literacy), “Padres Comprometidos” curriculum, school wellness (nutrition & fitness), arts residencies. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Cypress Hills Community School (CHCS) is a dual-language school that serves 473 students, a population that is 94% Hispanic and 93% of whom qualify for free or reduced lunch. Our ELL population makes up 47% of the student body. Furthermore, there has been an increase in our SIFE population, currently at 4 %, and students with special needs, currently at 25%. In order to address the needs of this specialized population, the CHCS developed a school-wide dual language program in 1997; in 2008 a dual language Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) program; in 2010 a Newcomers Middle School program. In launching these unique programs, PS 89 established a strong process oriented approach to creating and implementing unique educational practices that includes an over-arching instructional focus on supporting student’s oral language abilities to articulate their thinking in academic conversations. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our instructional focus for school year 2017-2018, was to continue to strengthen instruction and curriculum by emphasizing the development of oral language so that students are able to articulate their thinking in academic conversations. In mathematics, we emphasized problem based lessons so that students are able to justify varied pathways to solve problems. As a result of our emphasis on innovative instructional practices around oral language development, the Survey Element Scores in the Framework for Great Schools in the area of Rigorous Instruction continue to demonstrate improvement. The scores saw an increase from 2.31 to 2.87, a .56 increase. However, although the school continues to see an increase in all Survey Element Scores, there is a need to strengthen the structures that create a positive learning environment for student success. Currently, 68% of students say that students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate other students at their school. Even though this is higher than both the district and the city average by 20%, it is an area that the school can improve upon particularly when there is a discrepancy between student and teacher perceptions. For example, only 63% of teachers say that adults at the school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities. This is 12% less than the district and citywide average. As a result, the school will reflect on current social emotional learning practices so as to strengthen teachers' capacity to promote a sense of belonging and acceptance in all students so that students feel safe and connected to school. This will be done through faculty and staff training, ensuring consistency and accountability across all stakeholders and providing family workshops. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 19K089 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 457 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 10 10 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 29 17 12 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 89.3% % Reduced Lunch 44.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.3% 94.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.17 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 21.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 69% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 99 101 94.1% 3.5% 23.4% 3.1% 0.9% 1.5% 4 43% 6.4 12.9% 17% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Since the implementation of the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS), the Cypress Hills Community School (CHCS) has reflected upon the implementation of our Dual Language Program and methods by which we can continue to elevate students' skills - in both languages - across content areas. For several years, assessment tools at the school have been designed and revised to enable teachers to gather data that demonstrates the acquisition of higher-order skills both in ELA and mathematics. ELA Performance Tasks and Math Learning Target Assessments are administered several times a year at grades K-8 and are graded using criteria based rubrics that measure student’s knowledge, skills and thinking. Students’ longitudinal growth is tracked on a school developed spreadsheet. This spreadsheet communicates students’ progress towards meeting grade level standards. This type of embedded assessment allows teachers to deeply understand student attainment of knowledge and skills and to translate this knowledge into improvements in instruction. In addition, teachers in grades K-8 utilize the Fountas & Pinnell (F&P)Benchmark Assessment Systems to identify the current reading levels of their students in English. To determine a students' reading level in Spanish, teachers utilize the Evaluacion del Desarrollo del la lectura2. Through these tools, teachers analyze the written running records to better understand what students know, how they use that knowledge, and what they still need to learn which in turn informs the grouping of students by reading level. Using a combination of summative data from F&P reading records, Performance Series reading skills assessment and on-going formative assessments embedded within the integrated humanities units of study, teachers are developing knowledge around reading behaviors and developing a deeper understanding of how to analyze student work/data to accelerate students reading. However, despite the cycles of support provided by the Early Reading Matters Consultant around topics such as looking at formative data to plan for instruction in Guided Literacy and planning for Shared Reading, as well as, developing teacher conferencing practices to support student' Independent Reading, data from the end of year Fountas & Pinnell independent reading levels indicate that we have more than 45% of our students in grades K-3 that are reading two or more levels below grade level standards. Our next step is to continue the momentum of building on high leverage literacy strategies with the support of the Early Reading Matters Consultant. 3  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. PS 89 literacy teachers will continue to increase Tier 1 instruction by using formative data to increase student reading skills. Through the use of the Early Reading Matters (ERM) Reading Behavior tool, teachers will track reading behaviors within a specific reading level so as to flexibly group students into the next instructional reading level. 4 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? K-3 Teachers Sept.-June Administration, School-based Coaches and Early Reading Matters Consultant K-3 Teachers Sept.-June Administration, School-based Coaches and Early Reading Matters Consultant K-3 Teachers Sept.-June Administration, School-based Coaches and Early Reading Matters Consultant Administration, School-based Coaches and Early Reading Matters Consultant Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Deepening teacher practices in regards to Early Reading Matters teacher competencies and instructional strategies Use the ERM Reading Behaviors Tool ("I Can Tracker") throughout the year to take formative data on students' skills; plan targeted instruction; and advance students within instructional groupings more readily. Support Teacher Leaders in assuming greater responsibility over the Early Reading Matters work by giving clear steps and tools for doing this work between visits from the Early Reading Matters coach. Create explicit professional learning opportunities around how the areas of balanced literacy instruction support each other and plan for identified learning gaps within the most appropriate area of balanced literacy (whole groups vs. small group/guided instruction). K-8 Literacy Teachers Sept-June 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PS 89 will offer an ELA Family Night and an Oral Language Development Workshop to families focused on tools families can use to promote language development. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. *School-based Literacy Coach *External Consultants, i.e. Early Reading Matters Consultant *Monday Professional Development block 5  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. K-8 literacy teachers will use a combination of formative and summative assessments to determine explicit next steps to improve students’ reading comprehension across the K-8 continuum. Student growth will be formally assessed using the Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System three times a year and documented in the Cypress Hills Community School SY 2018-2019 Google Spreadsheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Student progress will be measured utilizing the Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System, alongside the Reading Performance Series for grades 3-8. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? For the last several years, the school’s positive response rate in the area of Supportive Environment on the NYC School Survey has out-performed the citywide average in all subcomponents except Social Emotional. Although the school has coordinated social emotional learning and youth development initiatives, only 63% of teachers say that adults at the school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities and only 67% of teachers say that the adults at the school have access to school based supports to assist in behavioral and emotional escalations. This is respectively 12% and 8% less than the district and citywide averages. Below are some of the school initiatives that promote a positive learning environment for school success: HOUSE Advisory: The CHCS House Advisement Program is a middle school initiative born out of the school-wide Project C.A.R.E. The House Advisement Program, known simply as House, was developed collaboratively by Middle School teachers. The cornerstones of the program are self-management, community service, and teacher-student rapport. The goal is to provide an intimate support system for students while facilitating group activities that teaches cooperation, responsibility, acceptance and respect. Student Led Conferences: In lieu of traditional conferences, students in grades 6-8, reflect on their learning progress, set academic goals and facilitate the conversation with their parent. The goal is for students to become accountable for their learning and be directly involved in their assessment process. Write to Read Day: Write to Read Day, initiated in May, 2012, is a celebration of literacy in all its many forms. Students in grades 6-8 are engaged in presentations from invited authors that read from their work and discuss their craft. Our goal is to inspire students to become interested in diverse genres and to engage in writing as a means of expression. Career Day: Initiated in May, 2013, students in grades K-8 participate in hands-on activities via class trips or presentations from representatives from diverse professional fields so that they can learn concretely about different careers. Our goals is that students begin to think about their future and learn about career options available in their community and beyond. College Day: Initiated in September, 2016, students in grades 6-8 participate in the College Access for All initiative. Through this program, students have the opportunity to visit a college campus several times in grades 6-8. Our next step is to continue to strengthen professional development supports for teachers so that they are skilled in transforming conflict, regulating behavior and able to incorporate stress management techniques into their teaching practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 7  By June 2019, PS 89 teachers will build their capacity to ensure students learn personal and social responsibility and shared accountability for their classroom climate. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Faculty and Staff Training (i.e. Bullying/Harassment, Classroom Management) All Staff Members Sept - December Guidance Counselor, AP Weekly CARE Lessons (K-5) administered by classroom teachers, with collaborations from Peer Mediators and Middle School House Members All Students Sept - June Teachers and Guidance Counselor Guidance Counselor and Administration Grade Band Meetings/Assemblies (October, January, April, June) All Students Oct, Jan, April, June In collaboration with CBOs, Outside Vendors (i.e. EnAct, NYC Children’s Theater’s Anti-Bullying Programs) n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement na na na How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. PS 89 will offer a series of family workshops focused on bullying and conflict management. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. *Parent Co-Coordinator *Guidance Counselor *Tuesday Parent Engagement Time *Teacher Per Session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 9  PS 89 will see a decrease in conflicts that lead to Principal Suspensions and an increase in parent attendance at peace in the family workshops. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The decrease in conflicts will be measured by a decrease in OORS reporting and increased attendance at workshops. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school is grounded in the spirit of collaboration and reflection. Teachers come together to analyze student work, to collaboratively create units of studies, to adapt curriculum based on current student data, and to explore best practices. During grade level meetings, teachers collaborate with other teachers on the grade, sharing resources, sharing observations of how students are working within a given task, and deciding on the next steps based on the observations and reflections teachers make of their students. Common language is established during meetings to allow teachers and coaches to communicate effectively. Furthermore, we support teacher development through Cycles of Learning, where collaborative planning and lesson implementation is aided with the support of an in-house coach or consultant. In this cycle of learning, coaches and teachers team up to set clear instructional goals for the cycle based on the Danielson Rubric for Teaching and monitor progress toward the goal through meetings and observations. In addition, we use the Monday professional time, weekly common planning periods, support from outside consultants, and the model teacher team, to differentiate professional development for groups, co-teaching or grade-level teams, and individuals. The result is a collaborative learning community where the teachers’ improvements and transformations are observed after concrete recommendations are made and appropriate support provided. Below are embedded school-based structures that support this work: Model Teachers: Model teachers have supported collaboration and ongoing adult learning in the school in three ways: 1) Facilitating Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) around Looking at Student Work, focused on a particular area of interest; 2) Offering weekly Office Hours for all staff, opening their doors to informally consult, demonstrate, or model practices for colleagues; 3) Engaging in Special Projects which highlights their strengths i.e. modeling classroom practices for a new teacher; facilitating curriculum team meetings; presenting to partner schools regarding the theory and practice of educating ELLs. Professional Learning Communities (PLC): Model Teachers and Coaches facilitate looking at student work with a content focus. During these meetings, staff, coaches and school’s leaders discuss the work, monitor its development and share feedback as to its impact on teacher effectiveness. During SY 2017-2018, seven PLC's met for seven sessions over a period of four months. Some of the topics of inquiry covered were Academic Conversations, Oral Language Development in Early Childhood and Assessing English Language Learners. This professional development structures have contributed significantly to the related goal of developing capacity within the CHCS faculty by increasing its teacher leadership so that professional development may be differentiated through this shared structure. The school’s professional development program is based on the belief that we all need ongoing support. As a result, the school has built a thought- full plan for creating a supportive in-house coaching program that addresses the specific needs of the dual language teacher through Cycles of Learning and teacher led PLCs. This innovation allows the expansion of in-house coaching so that teachers can learn directly from their peers. Through the school's participation in programs such as the Learning Partners Program, Advanced Academic and Personal 1  Behaviors Institute, Algebra for All, D19 Chancellor’s Math Innovation Grant, and the NYC Teaching Academy, the Cypress Hills Community School has expanded on this collaborative practice by opening the building to more educators and strengthening our learning through reflection and the revision of practice. Our next step is to continue to strengthen the staff's leadership capacity by mapping out the professional learning plan with input form Teacher Leaders. The plan will include regularly scheduled meetings to mentor their capacity to analyze data to inform instructional practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will participate in a professional learning community that will engage in an inquiry approach to monitoring the impact of the academic program on student progress. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Monday Professional Development time will prioritize school teams working together in organized Professional Learning Communities focused on the effectiveness of academic programs and/or instructional practices on student progress. Classroom observations conducted by administrators, coaches and consultants will serve to triangulate the teaching-learning-assessment cycle. Based on observation and feedback, teachers will participate in professional development opportunities tailored to their needs, such as peer-observation, self-assessment through videotaping, cycles of learning with school-based coach. All teachers Sept.-June Administrators, Coaches and Teacher Leaders All teachers October-June Administrators and Coaches All teachers October - June Administrators, Coaches and Teacher Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will prioritize Tuesday Family Engagement Time to communicate student progress to families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. *School based Coaches *External Consultants, i.e. Teaching Matters Literacy Consultant *Monday Professional Development *Tuesday Parent Engagement Time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 3  Teachers will document student academic gains utilizing the SY 2018-2019 Google Spreadsheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Based on the inquiry topic explored, teachers will monitor growth with one of the following tools: F & P Running Record; Math Inventory; Performance Series; Math Learning Target Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In order to meet the objectives of a dual language education, significant preparation is required, including continued professional development, collaborative planning, and procurement of and familiarity with effective tools and materials. Our goal is to establish a sound foundation both academically and social-emotionally for our students, so that over the course of their school years they demonstrate gains in both native and second language development, as well as meet the rigorous goals set for them by the city and state of New York. The success of the CHCS program is reflected in the consistent performance in both the School Quality Snapshot and the NYC School Survey Report. From 2015 to 2018, the school’s Framework for Great Schools element scores, as well as, the NYC School Survey scores have steadily increased in the following areas: rigorous instruction, collaborative teachers and effective school leadership. In addition, for SY 2017-2018, the school out-performed the district and city-wide averages in the following Framework Elements: collaborative teachers, supportive environment and strong family-community ties. Professional development (PD) at the CHCS has taken on varied forms over the years to meet the evolving needs of the program. Our team of coaches has a wealth of institutional and pedagogic knowledge and is well versed in teaching both ELLs and SWD. Coupling this expertise with administration’s analysis of teacher performance supports us in defining a focus for professional development. For example, Danielson Component 3b repeatedly proved a challenge for the majority of the staff. We used this area of questioning and discussion to guide all aspect of PD from inter-visitations, one-on-one conferencing, and workshops tailored to the needs of the staff. We’ve leveraged the use of model teachers to initiate new practices related to academic conversations in the classroom such as facilitating professional learning communities focused on looking at student work. For example, in math, teachers use Number Talks to give voice to students and to value various representations of mathematical thinking. Number Talks is an instructional routine that encourages students to explain their thinking and build oral skills while developing a concepts and fluency in math operations. In addition to Number Talks, there is a focus on Problem-Based Lessons, which push students to collaboratively explore concepts through real-world scenarios. Tasks are thoughtfully chosen with Universal Design for Learning in mind, specifically “low floor, high ceiling” problems, which ensure an entry point for a range of levels and opportunity to extend the thinking to more sophisticated mathematical concepts for those that are ready. Discussion around the concepts is focused on the student work and the problem solving strategies displayed in the classroom. Increasing teacher awareness around math representation vs. math strategy has been especially impacted math pedagogy in grades 3-5. In focusing on strategy through multiple representations, students and teachers are able to better see and discuss the underlying concepts. Furthermore, in literacy, teachers use a combination of formative and summative assessments to determine explicit next steps to improve students’ reading comprehension across the K-8 continuum. For example, in K-3, teachers are working with a literacy consultant from Early Reading Matters, to increase teachers pedagogy around balanced literacy components such as shared reading, guided literacy, and read alouds with the goal of increasing students reading comprehension. A teacher leader from each grade level has received direct professional development through six full day workshops that build their teacher leader capacity and collaboratively improve teacher practice around these balanced literacy components. In Grades 4-8 teachers incorporate guided literacy where targeted 5  reading comprehension skills are taught. Using a combination of summative data from F&P reading records, Performance Series reading skills assessment, and on-going formative assessment embedded within the integrated humanities units of study, teachers are developing knowledge around reading behaviors and developing a deeper understanding of how to analyze student work/data to accelerate students reading. Our next step is to continue to build the capacity of teachers to utilize these tools more explicitly to address the needs of our English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, all teachers will increase their capacity to use multiple forms of data to inform differentiation in classrooms, in particular identification of cohort needs and student groupings, such as English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Monday Professional Development Time Teachers will work in grade level teams to modify Unit Pacing Calendars based on student data Consultant and Coaches will work with targeted teacher teams to use student work to inform instructional and guided groups Support teachers and teacher teams in building their capacity to share promising structures, systems and strategies for addressing the needs of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities in an integrated curriculum model All Teachers September-June Targeted Teacher Teams September-June All Teachers September-June Administration, Coaches and Consultants Administrators, Coaches and Consultants Coaches, Model Teachers and Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will work in collaboration to implement curriculum nights (Early Literacy, ELA, Math and Science) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. *Model Teachers *Coaches *Consultants *Monday Professional Development Time *Per Diem to cover teachers to work with consultants Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 7  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. All grade level teams will have a documented ELA and Math curriculum that includes strategies for addressing the needs of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Completed Curriculum Maps for grades K-8 in ELA and Mathematics. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Families have a strong voice and an active role in decision-making that supports high expectations for all students. Parents and community members take an active role as members of the Governance Council (aka School Leadership Team) and Parent-Teacher Collaborative (aka Parent Teacher Association) . In addition, a parent co-director works alongside the principal, which also contributes to parents having direct input into the day-to-day decisions of the school. A myriad of outreach initiatives including curriculum nights, parent-teacher conferences, family fitness nights, and daily parent workshops regarding parent, language/technology skill development, and/or nutrition are offered and cultivate purposeful parental involvement. As a result, parents are highly engaged in school activities and decision-making that support student achievement. In order to further strengthen the home-school connection, over the last two years, CHCS has initiated twice-yearly student-led conferences (SLCs) to replace traditional Parent/Teacher conferences in grades 5-8. Students are guided to reflect upon their current work in each core subject class, select one piece of work to include in their SLC portfolio, and present each piece along with their overall growth and goals, to their parent or guardian and SLC Advisor. As a culmination of the SLC process, our eighth grade students are responsible for portfolio presentations in which they choose an area of growth--as a reader, writer or thinker--select work to illustrate this growth (a “challenge” and an “accomplishment”), and present it orally and through the creation of a website. Our goal is for students to come away from Middle School knowing themselves as learners, with the tools to communicate about their learning, self-advocate, take academic risks, and acknowledge the value of effort and learning. Underlying our work with all stakeholders is Project C.A.R.E. (Communication, Accountability, Respect and Effort). These core values guide practices and policies and provide a common language we, as a school community, have deemed necessary for fostering and maintaining a peaceful and productive environment. The Project CARE initiative aims to align instruction, discipline procedures and the school environment to Social Emotional Learning (SEL) objectives. SEL is ultimately about developing a strong capacity for responsible decision making; it involves developing skills and strategies around self-awareness, self-management, social awareness, and relationships. We come closer and closer to realizing this vision by building on our assets: strong partnerships with like-minded organizations, quality professional development for our staff, and engagement of the entire family in the learning process. Through various partnerships and networking opportunities, we have the occasion to share best practices. Below are a few examples that have afforded us the opportunity to reflect on our school learning initiatives and, thereby, influence policy and communities interested in learning about our unique programs: ExpandEd School Network : Through The Afterschool Corporation’s (TASC) Expanded Learning Time (ELT) initiative, the school partners with the Cypress Hills Local Development Corporation (CHLDC), our partner CBO. In partnership with CHLDC, the school provides enrichment and instruction, including the implementation of a social emotional learning curriculum, to students until 5:30pm. The program has grown from serving 100 seats to 300 students. Ashoka Changemaker Schools Network: As a member of the Ashoka Changemaker’s Schools Network, schools share best practices with each other and benefit from opportunities to collaborate with other schools. Ashoka’s Changemaker Schools Network is a national community of leading elementary schools that are committed to a 9  vision of education that helps young people become changemakers, starting with making empathy as important to children’s education as other skills like reading and math. This core value is reflected in our social emotional learning initiative, Project C.A.R.E. Our next step is to continue to strengthen these partnerships to improve family access to teaching and learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Grades K-8 will implement grade level community meetings each month. These meetings will be collaboratively planned by teachers to address the SEL competencies as they relate to the larger community. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Schedule monthly grade level community meetings that address the SEL competencies K-8 teachers and students Sept - June K-8 Teachers and Administration Hallway bulletin boards will reflect CARE Components K-8 teachers Sept - June K-8 Teachers and Family Workshops series focused on the characteristics of young adolescents and how it impacts students’ readiness to learn and their ability to become truly college and career ready All Families Oct., Feb., April Administration Parent Coordinator and Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. *Unididos US *Cypress Hills Local Development Corporation *Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility *FHI360 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. *Parent Coordinator *Guidance Counselor *Tuesday Family Engagement Time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1  School-wide schedule of community meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. *Increased attendance at family workshops Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Results on F&P Running Records Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) *Leveled Literacy Intervention System *Guided Literacy Mathematics Results on Math Performance Series and Math Learning Target Assessments *Marilyn Burns, Do the Math * Problem based lessons Science Social Studies NA NA NA NA At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) *PPT Referral *Peer Mediation *Teacher Recommendation *Collaborative Problem Solving *At Risk Counseling *Targeted small group *One-on-one Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) *Targeted small group instruction during the school day During School Day and After School *After school tutoring *Targeted small group instruction during the school day * After school tutoring NA NA During School Day and After School NA NA During School Day 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 20 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. STH STUDENTS ARE ENTITLED TO FREE MEALS AND TRANSPORTATION (FROM AND TO SCHOOL). THE SCHOOL WILL PROVIDE REMEDIAL ACADEMIC Intervention PROGRAMS AND COUNSELING FOR THOSE STH WHO NEED IT. Access to school uniforms Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  College and University Partners   Teacher Mentors School-based Coaches and Consultants 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development is consistent with ongoing work to address teacher development that is responsive to student needs. 1. Summer Institutes in July and/or August focused on partnership planning and curriculum planning 2. Mandated (75 minute) professional work time periods are dedicated to:   teacher teams developing standards aligned ELA performance tasks and Math Learning Target assessments. "Math Talks" and instructional strategies to support facilitation of the math practice standards and related learning progressions.  Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) facilitated by the school-based coaches and/or a model teachers for math teachers Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 6  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.).  PreK Dual Language Curriculum  Parent Workshops are offered in June to support the student transition   Initial Oral Language data gathered utilizing Brigance Early Childhood Assessment Facilitated teacher transition meetings 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. As a school-wide dual language program, all of our students are language learners, and nearly 1 of every 2 an ELL. As such, professional development plans consistently take into account ELL-specific needs. Effective and Highly Effective practices as defined in the Danielson Framework for Teaching, particularly in the focus areas for our school (1e - designing coherent instruction, 3b using questioning and discussion techniques; and 3c using assessment in instruction) correlate to the Guiding Principles for Dual Language Education. Coaches and consultants meet with classroom teachers in kindergarten through eighth grade to provide additional support regarding scaffolding and differentiation for ELLs. For example, content area teachers are meeting with consultants to develop several units of study that emphasize the integration of content and language goals. Since the entire school is part of the dual language program, monthly staff meetings and grade level meetings address ELLs. The school keeps agendas and sign in sheets for each meeting in order to ensure that all school staff members receive the minimum 7.5 hours of ELL training. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 7  Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 392,269.00 28,097.00 21,988.00 0 3,091,087.00 X X X X Section 7 & 8 Section 5 Section 6 Section 5 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program. 8   Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Cypress Hills Community School Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Cypress Hills Community School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. 0  Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Cypress Hills Community School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; 1 ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Cypress Hills Community School School-Parent Compact (SPC) Cypress Hills Community School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum I. School Responsibilities: s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; 2  ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the TItle I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; 3  ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Since the implementation of the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS), the Cypress Hills Community School (CHCS) has reflected upon the implementation of our Dual Language Program and methods by which we can continue to elevate students' skills - in both languages - across content areas. For several years, assessment tools at the school have been designed and revised to enable teachers to gather data that demonstrates the acquisition of higher-order skills both in ELA and mathematics. ELA Performance Tasks and Math Learning Target Assessments are administered several times a year at grades K-8 and are graded using criteria based rubrics that measure student’s knowledge, skills and thinking. Furthermore, all students are assessed in K-8 English using the Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System and in Spanish using the Evaluacion del Desarollo de Lectura 2 (EDL2) three times during the year. Students in 4-8 also take the Performance Series English Reading assessment online. Writing is assessed in both languages across all grades at a minimum 3 times per year using the Writing Pathways: Performance Assessments and Learning Progressions. Students’ longitudinal growth in these areas are tracked on a school developed spreadsheet and shared in a Google document with teachers, coaches and administration. This spreadsheet communicates students’ progress towards meeting grade level standards. This type of embedded assessment allows teachers to deeply understand student attainment of knowledge and skills and to translate this knowledge into improvements in instruction. Teachers use the data to differentiate instruction and create small groups within the classroom, as well as to create academic intervention groups during the school day as well as, in the after school program. For example, during the school day, grades K-2 bilingual certified teachers, beginning October, 2018 through June, 2019, provide small group instruction to At Risk students 2x a week for a 45 minute period. In grades 3-5, bilingual certified teachers, beginning October, 2018 through June, 2019, provide small group instruction to At Risk students 3x a week for a 45 minute period. Many of these students are newcomer ELLs who receive instruction in their native language. In addition, 10 Bilingual certified teachers provide small group instruction for students in grades 3-8, as part of a 1x a week differentiated instructional program in after school. Students participate in this program for a 60 minute period, beginning November, 2018 through April, 2019. Instruction is in English or Spanish depending on the needs of each group. Progress in students NYSESLAT NYS Math, NYS ELA scores, as well as, literacy assessments for reading and writing are used to determine the after school intervention groups. During SY 2016-2017, we saw a 8% decrease in our students scoring Level 1 on the NYS ELA Exam. However, progress in the NYS Math Exam was stagnant with only a 1% decrease in level 1s. As a result, during SY 2018-2019, we will continue to focus on providing targeted small group intervention support in Mathematics for students in grades 3-8 during the after school program, also called Cypress Hills Learning Center. Approximately, 150 students will be serviced through this after school intervention program with a ratio of one teacher to 10 students. Teachers will utilize Do the Math (3-5) and Do the Math Now (6-8). These supplemental programs are designed to support 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information struggling students develop a solid foundation in arithmetic through 13 scaffolded modules focused on whole numbers and fractions. Attendance at these programs will be managed by the school administration with teacher and student attendance documented in a shared Google file. Below is a proposed schedule for this differentiated instructional program: Teacher/ Grade Day 1 Time Day 2 Time Day 3 Time Content Start Date (Wk of 12/7) End Date (Wk of 3/18) Anticipated Total Sessions (less days off) T1 Grade 3 Wednesday 3:15 - 4:00 Thursday 3:55 - 4:40} Friday 3:55 - 4:40^ Math Wed 12/8/16 Fri 3/17/17 42 T2 Grade 3 Wednesday 2:25 - 3:10 Thursday 3:55 - 4:40 Friday 3:35 - 4:20` Math Wed 12/8/16 Fri 3/17/17 42 T3 Grade 4 Wednesday 2:25 - 3:10 Thursday 2:25 - 3:10^ -- -- Math 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Wed 12/8/16 Th 3/16/17 28 T4 Grade 4 Wednesday 2:25 - 3:10 Thursday 2:25 - 3:10^ -- -- Literacy Wed 12/8/16 Th 3/16/17 28 T5 Grade 5 Wednesday 2:25 - 3:10 Thursday 2:25 - 3:10^ -- -- Math Wed 12/8/16 Th 3/16/17 28 T6 Grade 5 Thursday 2:25 - 3:10 Friday 2:50 - 3:35`` -- -- Math Wed 12/8/16 Fri 3/17/17 26 T7 Grade 6 Thursday 2:25 - 3:10 -- -- -- -- Math Wed 12/8/16 Th 3/16/17 14 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information T8 Grade 6 Thursday 2:45 - 3:30 Friday 2:45 - 3:30 -- -- Math Wed 12/8/16 Fri 3/17/17 26 T9 Grade 7 Thursday 2:45 - 3:30 Friday 2:45 - 3:30 -- -- Math Wed 12/8/16 Fri 3/17/17 26 T10 Grade 8 Thursday 2:45 - 3:30 Friday 2:45 - 3:30 -- -- Math Wed 12/8/16 Fri 3/17/17 26 Moreover, students enrolled in the Cypress Hills Learning Center after school program from 2:20 pm to 5:20 pm, Monday through Friday, receive learning labs with a bilingual certified teacher twice a week, beginning in September, 2018 through June, 2019. During learning labs, students have access to computers to complete assignments as well as use programs to supplement classroom instruction. These programs include RAZ kids for literacy instruction in kindergarten through 2nd grade, ABC Mouse for math and literacy instruction in kindergarten and 1st grade and BrainPOP for science instruction in kindergarten through 3rd grade. Middle school students participate in career planning and research activities. Students in sixth through eighth grade also participate in literacy enrichment activities such as Yearbook and Loop & Listen (where students listen to and discuss audiobooks) once a week. 3 Bilingual Teachers and 1 ESL certified teacher run these programs which begin in October and continue until June. A bilingual certified teacher runs a program using iPads to engage reluctant readers during library periods and as part of the Learning Center after school program. 9 Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Coaches and consultants provide professional development that supports the school-wide goal of examining instructional strategies that support differentiated instruction for English Language Learners. The school-wide instructional focus is on developing academic vocabulary in all content areas since 47% of our student population is English Language Learners. As a result, our focus must be on building language and scaffolding language for students. Because of this, our school has dedicated a tremendous amount of time learning the craft of fostering academic conversations in our students. Collaboratively, we researched the best ways to sustain academic discussions and common practices that support student talk, such as structured “turn and talks”, use of language stems and "number talks". Our common practices around academic conversations have provided teachers with the opportunity to develop similar habits throughout the grades with the goal of developing academic language in both English and Spanish. Furthermore, this year, the Tier 1 instruction has become more targeted with the use of Early Reading Matters (ERM) Reading Behavior tools. For example, through a professional learning community (PLC) a range of grade 1 to 3 teachers have been using specific ERM Reading Behavior Tools to identify targeted objectives for a specific guided reading group. Using this reading behavior tool, teachers track reading behaviors within a specific reading level. After several guided reading sessions, teachers administer a running record to formally document whether students are using the specific reading behaviors for the level as specified on the ERM Reading Behavior Tool. Students, then, are flexibly regrouped into the next instructional reading levelthus not remaining stagnant in one guided reading group the whole year. In this way, teachers are using formative data to increase students reading skills. The support provided by coaches and consultants includes co-planning, focused inter-visitations, modeling and consistent observation of student development. All teachers in kindergarten through 8th grade receive professional development focused on developing academic language during the Monday Professional Development block. Below is a sample schedule of some of the topics that will be covered during the Monday Professional Development block: 10/22/2018 K-3 Early Reading Matters (ERM) teacher competencies and instructional strategies Early Reading Matters Consultant Number Talks 3-8 Math Ines Ellis Guardiola, Math Coach 0  Part C: Professional Development Partnerships and Specially Designed Instruction 5-8 Ms. Tamara Brown, IEP Coordinator 11/05/2018 K-3 Using the ERM Reading Behaviors Tool (“I Can Tracker”) to take formative data on students’ skillsEarly Reading Matters Consultant Number Talks 3-8 Math Ines Ellis Guardiola, Math Coach Partnerships and Specially Designed Instruction 5-8 Ms. Tamara Brown, IEP Coordinator 12/3/2018 K-3 Using formative assessments to plan for identified learning gaps within the most appropriate area of balanced literacy (whole groups vs. small group/guided instruction) Early Reading Matters Consultant Number Talks 3-8 Math Ines Ellis Guardiola, Math Coach Partnership and Specially Designed Instruction 5-8 Ms. Tamara Brown, IEP Coordinator 12/117/2018 K-3 Plan targeted instruction and advance students within instructional groupings Early Reading Matters Consultant Number Talks 3-8 Math Ines Ellis Guardiola, Math Coach Partnerships and Specially Designed Instruction 5-8 Ms. Tamara Brown, IEP Coordinator In addition, teachers participating in the Title III differentiated instructional program will participate in a Professional Learning Community (PLC) that will measure the impact of the academic intervention programs on student progress. These PLCs will take place over seven Monday Professional Development blocks. During these sessions teachers will reflect on the Essential Question: How has the student’s performance in the classroom been impacted by the academic intervention services program? A school-wide 2018-2019 Professional Development Calendar exists in a sharedd Google Drive. The calendar documents the differentiated professional development groups for the entire staff, such as Assessment Design, Data Analysis, Early Literacy Strategies and Specially Designed Instruction. In addition, the shared Google Drive documents the agendas and powerpoints for each professional development offered by the coaches and consultants. Attendance sheets are stored in the main office. Futhermore, all K-6 bilingual special education certified teachers received training in the Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI) systems. This program is designed for students in grades K-6 who are reading below grade level with the goal of bringing them up to grade-level performance in as little as 18-24 weeks. The intervention is in addition to classroom literacy instruction. 1  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Cypress Hills Community School offers multiple parent engagement activities targeted towards parents of ELLs through programs such as Padres Comprometidos , Urban Advantage and Wellness in the Schools. These programs meet during school, after school and on the weekends. The Padres Comprometidos will be offered in the fall of 2018 during the months of September and October. This 8-Week program trains parents who are not traditionally involved with schools to: • Understand the United States public school system. • Develop goals for their children to ensure they attend college. • Understand the academic requirements for college readiness. • Model behaviors at home that encourage and promote learning. In the Spring of 2019, the school will offer the STEM at Home program. The Padres Comprometidos: STEM at Home program aims to promote parent education and engagement around the STEM standards for student success. Through the six-week program, parents develop a greater understanding of the benefits and the academic pathway to support their child’s interest in the STEM field. Additionally, parents will: • Demonstrate increased support and raised academic expectations • Become empowered through small-group instruction, hands-on activities, role-playing, problem solving of real life situations, discussions, and honest dialogue • Gain access in a learning environment that is meaningful to Latino parents Furthermore, as partners with Urban Advantage, the school organizes three Family Field trips to one of the partnering science cultural institutions (e.g. Brooklyn Botanic Garden, Museum of Natural History, Hall of Science) on a weekend or school holiday. Urban Advantage is a citywide program to support science education and investigations. Free transportation and free admission is provided. Through our partnership with Wellness in the Schools (WITS) parents learn about nutrition. A WITS Chef leads seasonal culinary and nutrition education classes for families. In the labs, parents prepare simple, affordable and healthy recipes. The sessions introduce families tot he importance of healthy eating and seasonal ingredients. The school also hosts Family Fitness Nights three times a year (January, March, May). During Family Fitness Nights, students and their families participate in exciting fitness classes led by WITS Coaches and Physical Education Teachers (e.g. basketball, Zumba, yoga). Complete with a complementary healthy creative salad dinner, Family Fitness Nights provide an opportunity for the entire family to come together in a fun and festive atmosphere. All workshops are conducted in English and Spanish. The school’s Parent Coordinator, who is bilingual, reaches out to parents to communicate about school events and ensure that parents’ 2  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities needs are heard. School publications (i.e. pamphlets, newsletters, school website, and letters to parents) are used to apprise parents of important upcoming events including testing dates, school events and family workshops. All school publications are in English and Spanish. Attendance to all events are stored in the Parent Involvement Binder located in the school's main office. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $16,982 $2,837 $3,550  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) $2,160 Travel Other $2,837 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Per Session for 10 teachers to provide after school direct instruction Funding to support the Professional Development Contract with Teaching Matters for the Early Reading Matters Consultant Services Funding to support the purchase of supplemental curriculum materials such as Do the Math and Leveled Literacy Intervention Systems for targeted intervention programs Funding to support the purchase of online Newsela subscription for used as a supplemental text for both the day school and afterschool program. Newsela provides differentiated, high-interest texts that are organized by content area. *Funding to support contract with Wellness in the Schools which provides nutrition education classes for families. 3 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. *Funding to supplement Urban Advantage family engagement activities to science cultural institutions. $28,366 TOTAL 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 19 School Name Cypress Hills Community School Borough Brooklyn School Number 89 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Irene Leon Coach Ines Ellis-Guardiola ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Christine Lee/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Neysha Colon/ Special Ed Teacher/Subject Area Natasha Marsh/Humanities Related-Service Provider Diane Restrepo/ Special Ed Superintendent Thomas McBryde Assistant Principal Sara Siddappa Coach N/A School Counselor Sasha Rincon Parent Erica Oquendo Parent Coordinator Amalfi Richard Field Support Center Staff Member Atara Booker Other (Name and Title) Berky Lugo-Salcedo, AP C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 1 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 15 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program 35 Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 5  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 442 Total number of ELLs 198 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 44.80% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) Lang. Spanish 1998-1999 Program TBE TBE TBE DL 2 2 DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 21 0 0 21 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? School-wide all students are assessed in both their home language and the new language (English and Spanish for all students). For math students are assessed with classroom assessments in students’ dominant language monthly in grades K-2 and bimonthly in grades 3-8. In addition, math periodic assessments are conducted using the Math Performance Series in English or Spanish three times per year. Writing data includes an overall score, as well as each student’s level in four grade-level writing standards. Where students are performing far below grade level, a prior grade level rubric is used to more accurately capture student performance and inform instructional next steps. For reading, the Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System is used K-3 for all students. In grades 4-8 F&P is used for English assessments for students performing below grade level on the computer-adaptive Reading Performance Series Assessment. Students K-8 are evaluated in reading in Spanish 6  using the Evaluacion del Desarollo de Lectura 2 (EDL 2). In addition to these periodic assessments, the Estrellita Accelerated Spanish Reading Program is used with with an emphasis on word study for Kindergartners. Baseline data informs classroom groupings as well as students who may require academic intervention services. Benchmark assessments inform ongoing grouping, including a possible extension of the program into first grade for students who are showing progress but require more time with the tool. Since Estrellita serves as a bridge to English for our newest and youngest language learners, it lays a strong foundation in Spanish literacy that contributes to a stronger transfer of skills and reading comprehension strategies in English. Teachers use formative assessment data to create flexible grouping , differentiate instruction, monitor student progress and create intervention groups. Consistent with current research, our data indicates that students are progressing more quickly in their home language than in English during the first few years of service. The dual language model actively supports this growth by providing content instruction in the home language with an emphasis on academic conversations. Integrated content instruction provided through thematic units in K-5, implemented by cross-content math-science or humanities teachers in the middle school, and curriculum like Expeditionary Learning and SERP’s Word Generation provide a structure on which to leverage vocabulary development across subject matter and the two languages. As such, ELLs tend to demonstrate a sharp increase in English performance after three years. Progress in both languages tends to even out after about 5-6 years, but can take longer for some learners. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? All assessment data is recorded in a Google drive shared among teachers, coaches and administration. Reading data is recorded across multiple years, so that teachers can monitor the rate of progress in each language in addition to current reading levels in the home and new language. Student progress is tracked throughout the year and teachers meet with instructional coaches in order to analyze student performance and plan to address particular instructional needs. Teachers use the data to differentiate instruction and create small groups within the classroom, as well as to create academic intervention groups as needed. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? On demand performance tasks at the end of each unit of study are evaluated across grades using the Writing Pathways: Performance Assessments and Learning Progressions, 2014 by Lucy Calkins and Colleagues from the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project for Grades K–8 (Heinemann: Portsmouth, NH). These rubrics are adapted for use with Spanish language writing pieces in addition to those written in English. Students take the computer-adaptive Reading Performance Series Assessment three times per year. The 2017 NYS ELA exam results showed a 1% increase in the number of ELLs scoring a Level 3 or 4 and an 8% decrease in the number of ELLs scoring a Level 1. The 2017 NYS Math exam results showed a 2% increase in number of ELLs scoring a Level 3 or 4 and an 1% decrease in the number of ELLs scoring a Level 1. While ELLs showed progress on ELA assessments, our data shows that supporting ELLs in Math instruction is an area of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? All assessment data is recorded in a shared Google drive among teachers, coaches and administration. Reading data is recorded across multiple years, so that teachers can monitor the rate of progress in each language in addition to current reading levels in the home and new language. Student progress is tracked throughout the year and teachers meet with instructional coaches in order to analyze student performance and plan to address particular instructional needs. Teachers use the data to differentiate instruction and create small groups within the classroom, as well as to create academic intervention groups as needed. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The school adheres to the Response to Intervention (RTI) model outlined in the NYC DOE Response to Intervention Reference Guide. All ELLs are screened using the Home Language Identification Survey and LAB-R. The school also conducts baseline literacy assessments within the first month of school and for all new students in English (using F&P) and in Spanish (using 7  EDL2). All ELLs are part of the dual language program and therefore receive core instruction delivered by bilingually certified teachers. In addition, nearly half of these bilingually certified teachers are also special educators serving students in our K-8 dual language ICT classes, the self-contained class, or through SETSS. All classroom teachers and middle school core content teachers have received specialized training to work with ELLs and/or students with individual education plans (IEPs). Furthermore, these teachers regularly engage in inquiry work with the support of their grade level team and the instructional coaches to capture and analyze data. Across the school student progress is tracked throughout the year during dedicated meeting times called intervention periods in K-5 and administrative periods in the middle school wherein grade-level teacher teams and coaches study student progress and strategize next steps. Classroom observations, student work, and historical and periodic assessment results together inform targeted planning, the development of modifications, and the creation of small groups for service within the classroom and more intensive support for students who require academic intervention. Students that need additional targeted (Tier 2) intervention receive additional support during small group instruction within the classroom and during pull-out through academic intervention periods. Teachers also provide differentiated instruction and supplemental materials for these students based on their needs. Progress in student NYSESLAT scores, NYS Math results, and literacy assessments for reading and writing are used to determine the overall effectiveness of ELL instruction and whether any adjustments must be made to core instruction or the program structure. Individual students who do not respond to Tier 2 interventions are referred to the Child Study Group (i.e. Pupil Personnel Committee) in order to develop Tier 3 intensive instructional plans. This includes, for example, ELLs reading more than two years below grade level in their native language (i.e., Spanish), ELLs with more than 2 years of service who are still scoring at the “entering” level on the NYSESLAT. Child Study Group members, comprised of 3 bilingually certified pedagogues, a bilingual guidance counselor, a bilingual social worker, and the IEP coordinator (a special educator), conduct low-inference observations, meet with classroom teachers who present student work, and devise a goal and action plan in order to monitor Tier 3 supports for individuals of concern in 10 week cycles to determine whether instruction is effective or adjustments need to be made. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Cypress Hills Community School uses a variety of assessment data including NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results and NYS Math and ELA results. All students are assessed in English using the Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System and in Spanish using the Evaluacion del Desarollo de Lectura 2 (EDL 2) three times during the year. Students also take the Performance Series Reading assessment online. All assessment data is recorded in a Google doc that is shared with teachers, coaches and administration. Additional performance tasks and other assessment data is also collected. All of this data is used to monitor ELLs progress and thus evaluate the success of the programs for ELLs. The school conducts periodic self-assessments of the program using the Guiding Principles for Dual Language Education (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: Center for Applied Linguistics. Howard, E. R., Sugarman, J., Christian, D., Lindholm-Leary, K. J., & Rogers, D. (2007). The tool was designed to help dual language programs with planning and ongoing implementation by addressing program issues in seven strands: Assessment and Accountability, Curriculum, Instruction, Staff Quality and Professional Development, Program Structure, Family and Community, and Support and Resources. The combination of quantitative data, anecdotal data, and supports our accountability to the language learners we serve and informs decision for program structure, and resource allocation. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? All assessment data including NYSITELL and NYSESLAT, NYS Math and NYS ELA results are recorded in Google drive shared among teachers, coaches and administration. Student progress is tracked throughout the year and teachers meet with instructional coaches in order to analyze student performance and plan to address particular instructional needs. Teachers use the data to differentiate instruction and create small groups within the classroom, as well as to create academic intervention groups as needed. Part IV: ELL Programming 8  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Cypress Hills Community School has a school-wide dual language program. All ELLs are part of this dual language program and receive their required periods of standalone and integrated ENL from their bilingual or ENL certified classroom teachers. The freestanding ENL program consists of two additional periods of standalone ENL for Entering and Emerging ELLs in 7th grade and 8th grade. There is also an ENL pullout group three periods a week for newcomers in third through fifth grade. b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. Cypress Hills Community School has a school-wide dual language program in Spanish and English. All ELLs are part of this dual language program and receive their required periods of standalone and integrated ENL from their bilingual or ENL certified classroom teachers. The dual language program consists of two classes per grade in kindergarten through eighth grade. In kindergarten through fourth grade students remain with the same classroom teacher who instructs in both Spanish and English. Students in fifth through eighth grade change teachers for Math, Science, Spanish Humanities, and English Humanities. There is a self-contained special education class for students in sixth, seventh and eighth grade taught by bilingual certified Special Education teachers. There are also ICT classes in kindergarten through eighth grade. All students are in heterogeneous, grade level classes with a mixture of ELLs and English Proficient students. The design of the dual language program in Kindergarten through fifth grade is based on a five day language cycle. Students switch the language of instruction every five days. Students in sixth through eighth grades receive both English and Spanish instruction in Science and Math. All Middle School students also receive Spanish instruction daily during Spanish Humanities class. English Humanities classes for entering and emerging ELLs in seventh and eighth grade are co-taught by a content certified teacher and an ENL certified teacher. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All ELLs are part of the school-wide dual language program. In kindergarten through sixth grade students receive all of their mandated units of support, both integrated and stand alone, from their bilingual certified classroom teachers. ELLs in seventh and eighth grade receive the mandated units of support during English Humanities (225 min/week) and Word Generation Academic Language Program (SERP) classes taught by an ENL certified teacher. All entering and emerging students in seventh and eighth grade receive the mandated 360 minutes per week, including 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL instruction during Word Generation classes. Transitioning and expanding students receive the mandated 180 minutes per week during English Humanities periods. All Middle School students also receive Spanish instruction daily during Spanish Humanities class (270 minutes/week). In kindergarten through fifth grade, bilingual certified classroom teachers alternate the language of instruction weekly. All instruction is in English one week and Spanish the following week. In Middle School, students receive English and Spanish instruction in content area classes throughout the week. Therefore all ELLs at Cypress Hills Community School receive English instruction 50% of the time and Home Language instruction 50% of the time. 9  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In kindergarten through fifth grade, bilingual certified classroom teachers alternate the language of instruction weekly. All instruction is in English one week and Spanish the following week. In Middle School, students receive English and Spanish instruction in content area classes throughout the week. Therefore all ELLs at Cypress Hills Community School receive English instruction 50% of the time and Home Language instruction 50% of the time. Across grades and classes teachers plan and implement instruction using common core aligned curricula and texts, including Engage NY, Expeditionary Learning, and Ready Gen. They plan and reflect on instruction using the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP), a research-based model that has proven effective in addressing the academic needs of new language learners throughout the United States. It consists of eight interrelated components: lesson preparation, building and activating prior knowledge, comprehensible input, strategies, interaction,practice/application, lesson delivery, and review & assessment. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? All students are assessed in Spanish using the Evaluacion del Desarollo de Lectura 2 (EDL 2) three times during the year. All assessment data is recorded in a Google doc that is shared with teachers, coaches and administration. This assessment data is used for differentiation and small groups. Student progress is tracked throughout the year and teachers meet with coaches in order to address particular instructional needs. Since content area instruction and assessments are conducted in both English and Spanish, teachers regularly assess student progress in their home language in Math, Science and Social Studies. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. All ELLs are part of the Dual Language program and thus receive both English and home language instruction from bilingual certified teachers. SIFE students in all grades receive differentiated and supplemental materials. The school’s Child Study Group is monitoring the progress of SIFE students and working to better support classroom teachers in addressing the needs of their SIFE students. SIFE students in third through fifth grade receive Guided Reading support and are often pulled as at risk students in SETSS groups. In sixth through eighth grade, SIFE students also participate in a cross-grade advisory class three times a week focused on building academic behaviors and literacy skills in their home language. b. All newcomers are part of the Dual Language program and thus receive both English and home language instruction from bilingual certified teachers. Newcomers in kindergarten through sixth grade receive stand alone and integrated ENL from their bilingual certified classroom teachers. Newcomers in seventh and eighth grade English Humanities classes are co-taught by a content certified teacher and an ENL certified teacher. Students in Middle School participate in Word Generation classes taught by a bilingual certified or ENL certified teacher. Word Generation is a supplementary literacy resource that provides a series of current event controversies designed to promote students’ academic language and argumentation skills. Teachers use the Bilingual Common Core Progressions as a guide for differentiating instruction and assessment for newcomers. c. All developing ELLs are part of the Dual Language program and thus receive both English and home language instruction from bilingual certified teachers. Students in Middle School participate in Word Generation classes taught by a bilingual certified or ENL certified teacher. The Word Generation program focuses on vocabulary development. During ELA Teachers use guided reading and conferencing to address the needs of students in this group. Teachers also use the Bilingual Common Core Progressions as a guide for differentiating instruction and assessment for developing ELLs. d. All long term ELLs are part of the Dual Language program and thus receive both English and home language instruction from 0  bilingual certified teachers. During ELA Teachers use guided reading and conferencing to address the needs of students in this group. Students in Middle School participate in Word Generation classes taught by a bilingual certified or ENL certified teacher. The Word Generation program focuses on vocabulary development. e. All former ELLs are part of the Dual Language program and thus receive both English and home language instruction from bilingual certified teachers. The nature of the dual language program ensures that students reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT continue to receive content area instruction and support in their home language while developing their English skills during English instruction. Based on literacy assessments and teacher observations students may continue to receive small group English support. ELLs continue to receive ELL testing accommodations for two years after reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All ELL-SWDs are part of the Dual Language program and thus receive both English and home language instruction from bilingual special education certified teachers. ELLs with special needs are part of the 12:1:1 self contained Bilingual Special Education class in seventh and eighth grade or the dual language ICT classes in kindergarten through eighth grade. ELL students who receive SETSS receive additional small group instruction from a bilingual special education teacher as per their IEP. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All ELL-SWDs are part of the Dual Language program and thus receive both English and home language instruction from highly qualified providers, bilingual special education certified teachers, who make decisions about how to effectively adapt curricular resources in order to support students in meeting their goals. As a school with dual language ICT in every grade, as well as two separate bilingual SETSS providers, we are well-equipped to foster flexible scheduling where appropriate for particular students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Newcomers in seventh and eighth grade English Humanities classes are co-taught by a content certified teacher and an ENL certified teacher. Students in Middle School participate in a supplemental literacy program, Word Generation, taught by a bilingual certified or ENL certified teacher. The Word Generation program focuses on vocabulary development. SIFE students also receive additional home language math support during small group instruction. In sixth through eighth grade, SIFE students also participate in a class three times a week focused on building academic behaviors and literacy skills in their home language. Classroom teachers use literacy assessments, math portfolio tasks, conferencing and observations to differentiate instruction and provide small group instruction in the content areas. Intervention programs are offered in English and Spanish depending on students' needs. For example, ELLs in kindergarten through second grade receive small group sessions twice per week using Despegando for Spanish intervention and The English Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI) system. ELLs in third through fifth grade receive intervention three times per week using Marilyn Burns Do the Math and The English Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI) system. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Due to a large SIFE population and an influx of newcomers in fourth through sixth grade, the school has hired an additional ENL teacher. English Humanities classes for entering and emerging ELLs in sixth grade grade will be co-taught by a content 1  certified teacher and an ENL certified teacher. An ENL teacher will provide small group instruction for ELLs in fourth and fifth grade. The school will also provide additional professional development and coaching for dual language teachers. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs or services will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Cypress Hills Community School has a school-wide dual language program. ELLs and English Proficient students are in heterogeneous classes. The nature of the dual language program ensures that school programs are conducted in both English and Spanish. ELLs have access to all school programs including enrichment and intervention programs. ELLs also participate in school programs such as Peer Mediation, band, yearbook and sports activities. Many ELLs also participate in the Learning Center after school program. Students receive homework support as well as the opportunity to participate in extracurricular activities such as technology classes, art, dance and sports programs, provided primarily by bilingual staff. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Across grades and classes teachers plan and implement instruction using common core aligned curricula and texts, including Engage NY, Expeditionary Learning, and Ready Gen. They plan and reflect on instruction using the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP), a research-based model that has proven effective in addressing the academic needs of new language learners throughout the United States. It consists of eight interrelated components: lesson preparation, building and activating prior knowledge, comprehensible input, strategies, interaction,practice/application, lesson delivery, and review & assessment. All classrooms have access to laptops and all classrooms are equipped with SMART boards. The school library is fully equipped with a diverse selection of books in English and Spanish. Teachers create graphic organizers and other instructional materials to differentiate for ELLs. The school has purchased Storia accounts which allow teachers to assign leveled reading material in English and Spanish for individual students and small groups. Teachers also use Duolingo on laptops or iPads for additional language practice. ELLs in all subgroups have access to these instructional materials. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Cypress Hills Community School’s dual language model ensures that all students receive home language instruction. The design of the dual language program in kindergarten through fifth grade is based on a weekly language cycle. Students switch the language of instruction every week. Students in 6th, 7th and 8th grades receive both English and Spanish instruction in Science, Math and Social Studies throughout the week. All Middle School students also receive Spanish instruction daily during Spanish Humanities class. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All programs and resources correspond to ELL’s ages and grade levels. For students in third through eighth grade the school uses several resources to provide high interest low-level texts for older ELLs. The RIGOR program also provides high interest guided reading texts for older students. The school has purchased Storia accounts which allow teachers to assign leveled reading material for individual students and small groups in both languages. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Cypress Hills Community School does not share a building. 2  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs meet with the Guidance Counselor for an interview and a tour of the school. Depending on their needs they may also participate in small group counseling to assist in the acculturation process. Parents/guardians of newly enrolled ELLs meet one on one with the parent coordinator to review parent involvement opportunities, school uniform, the wellness policy, and other questions the families may have. Teachers assign new students with class buddies to help guide them through the school day and answer questions. Classroom teachers in K-5 also conduct at least 3 social-emotional literacy lessons per week, which are opportunities for reflection and community building. Newly enrolled middle school students are assigned to a House, a cross-grade advisory group that meets three times a week first period to build SEL competencies and supports new students in their transition to middle school and for immigrant students support them with their acculturation process. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All instruction at Cypress Hills Community School is conducted in English and Spanish. There are no additional language electives offered. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. Instruction is in English 50% of the time and Spanish 50% of the time for all ELLs and EPs. In kindergarten through fifth grade teachers alternate the language of instruction weekly. In Middle School students receive content area instruction in both English and Spanish throughout the week. Middle School students receive English Humanities/ESL and Spanish Humanities every day. EPs and ELLs are integrated throughout the instructional day. In kindergarten through second grade may also receive home language support in a small group push-in program. b. The design of the dual language program in Kindergarten and first grade is based on a five day language cycle. Students switch the language of instruction every five days. In second through fifth grade the language of instruction rotates on a weekly basis. Students receive English instruction one week and Spanish instruction the following week. Middle School students receive both English and Spanish instruction in Science, Math and Social Studies throughout the week. Students receive half of their content area instruction in English and half in Spanish. Each content area teacher decides which periods will be taught in English and which ones will be in Spanish so that students receive English and Spanish instruction throughout the day in the different content area classes. c. Cypress Hills Community School uses the self-contained model. Students remain in one classroom. The classroom teacher instructs in both English and Spanish. 3  d. Emergent literacy is taught in both languages simultaneously. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The PD at Cypress Hills Community School is grounded in best practices for language acquisition, which we have found to be effective practices for a range of student learning profiles. In addition to the Guiding Principles for Dual Language Education, 2nd ed. (2007), mentor texts reflective of the most current research in dual language inform the work of both literacy and math coaches as they work with administrators to design a year-long professional development plan for teachers. As a school-wide dual language program, it is necessary that our content specialists supporting teachers are also language learning specialists. As such, both the math and literacy coach are bilingually certified educators. The professional development team is also comprised of model teachers, including an ENL provider and a bilingually certified special educator. This team of staff developers meets with individual teachers and teacher teams weekly through various structures established to facilitate collaborative planning across grade teams or vertical bands with a focus on looking at student work and studying content through a language learner’s lens. Curricular adaptations, assessment design, and careful selection of supplemental materials to support a large range of literacy abilities within a class are central to the work. The school media specialist/librarian also plays a central role in procuring digital and print media aligned to units represented in the grade level curriculum maps. She works with the technology coordinator and the staff development team to train the community on using platforms, tools, databases, etc. that support differentiated instruction in both English and Spanish with dynamic content. Below is a sample of the professional development at Cypress Hills Community school that relates directly to the Common Core Learning Standards. Such programming is consistent with ongoing work to address teacher development that is responsive to student needs. • Annual Dual Language Summer Institutes in August cross contents and include full day, standards-based workshops on topics such as Spanish/English text complexity, new and home language arts progressions, cross-content word work and vocabulary development. • Mandated (80 minute) professional work time periods are dedicated at least once per month to teacher teams developing the Spanish Humanities Curriculum for their grade in alignment with the standards-based curriculum provided in English. • Other mandated professional work time periods are dedicated at least monthly to mathematics with an emphasis on common language for terms in Spanish across grades and continuity of instructional strategies to support facilitation of the math practice standards and related learning progressions. • Professional Learning Communities facilitated by the math coach and/or a model teacher for math teachers grades 3-8 focused on modifications of the math curriculum to accommodate the needs of newcomers, and in particular SIFE students with severe gaps in content and skills. • Cross content teachers participate in a series of best practices 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In September middle school teachers are supported by an instructional coach in looking at data about their new students. Dual language content teachers, including math-science and humanities teachers, analyze the range of ELL levels in their classes alongside reading data in English and Spanish from the previous school year in order to develop a schema for groupings. In addition, middle school teachers adhere to similar practices that are used K-5, including using target colors to present each language, scheduled guided reading groups, and use of bilingual word walls. Teachers are supported in creating and 4  maintaining these practices through meetings with their coaches. . As a school-wide dual language program, all of our students are language learners, and nearly 1 of every 2 an ELL. As such, professional development plans consistently take into account ELL-specific needs. Effective and Highly Effective practices as defined in the Danielson Framework for Teaching, particularly in the focus areas for our school (1e - designing coherent instruction, 3b using questioning and discussion techniques; and 3c using assessment in instruction) correlate to the Guiding Principles for Dual Language Education. Our instructional focus will support student's oral language abilities to articulate their thinking in academic conversations. Students will expand home language and new language, use Tier 1 vocabulary to develop Tier 2 and Tier 3 academic vocabulary, justify pathways to solve problems and persevere to promote academic readiness. Coaches and consultants meet with classroom teachers in kindergarten through eighth grade to provide additional support regarding scaffolding and differentiation for ELLs. For example, content area teachers are meeting with consultants to develop several units of study that emphasize the integration of content and language goals. Since the entire school is part of the dual language program, monthly staff meetings and grade level meetings address ELLs. The school keeps agendas and sign in sheets for each meeting in order to ensure that all school staff members receive the minimum 7.5 hours of ELL training. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? All students and families are interviewed before they enter the school to ensure that they are familiar with the goals and structure of the dual language program. As a Dual Language school, where nearly one out of two students is an ELL, we use parent-teacher conferences to carefully review student progress across both languages in all content areas. In cases when ELLs are not showing progress in their dominant language and have fallen 2 years behind, we conduct individual meetings with these families to discuss language proficiency assessment results and the goals of the program. These are held by classroom teachers all of whom are bilingual. Teachers use the Tuesday parent engagement time to contact families about language development needs and student progress. The school maintains a family engagement log where teachers and administrators record interactions with parents. All communication is provided in the parent's preferred language. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are encouraged to attend Parent Teacher Collaborative (PTC) meetings that are held at times that are convenient for parents. For example, a rotational schedule of PTC meetings is developed in coordination with the PTC executives and the school in order to accommodate parents that cannot attend evening meetings only. PTC meetings are conducted in English and Spanish. Additional accommodations are made for parents with disabilities so that they too can participate. In addition to these monthly meetings, parents are invited to attend culminating celebrations marking their child’s success at the school, including band concerts, family art night, moving up ceremonies. School publications (i.e. information posted in entrance of school, pamphlets, newsletters, school website, and letters to parents) are used to apprise parents of important upcoming events including testing dates, school events and open school night. All of these materials are provided in both English and Spanish. Examples of parent workshops include Family Math Night, Family ELA Night, Family Spanish Night, Arts Night and high school preparedness workshops for middle school parents. Similarly, fifth grade parents, receive a middle school articulation workshop where the middle school articulation process is provided. In addition, the school counselor meets one on one with fifth grade families to assist in understanding the variety of programs in middle school and assist in completing necessary documentation. All workshops are conducted in English and Spanish. 5  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Irene Leon, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Cypress Hills Community School School DBN: 19K089 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Irene Leon Title Principal Sara Siddappa Assistant Principal Amalfi Richard Parent Coordinator Christine Lee ENL/Bilingual Teacher Erica Oquendo Parent Neysha Colon, Special Ed Teacher/Subject Area Natasha Marsh, Humanities Teacher/Subject Area Ines Ellis-Guardiola N/A Coach Coach Sasha Rincon School Counselor Thomas McBryde Atara Booker Diane Restrepo, Special Educat N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Atara Booker Other Special Education Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/27/17 10/27/17 10/27/17 10/27/17 10/27/17 10/27/17 10/27/17 10/27/17 10/27/17 10/27/17 10/27/17 10/27/17 10/27/17 10/27/17 10/27/17 8  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 19K089 School Name: PS/IS 89 Superintendent: McBryde The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Amalfi Richard Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. PS 89 uses the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), as well as conversations with parents to determine the written translation and oral interpretation needs of all families. The school will determine, at the time of enrollment, the primary language spoken by the parent of each student enrolled in the school, and if such language is not English, whether the parent requires language assistance in order to communicate effectively with the school. The school shall maintain an appropriate and current record of the primary language of each parent. Such information will be maintained in ATS and on the student emergency card. Register data reports that 95% of our student population is of hispanic descent. In addition, 45% of our student population is classified as English Language Learners. Therefore, written translation and oral interpretation services are only required in Spanish. Due to the nature of our dual language program, ninety-five percent of the school staff is bilingual so teachers consistently communicate with parents in both English and Spanish. P.S. 89 will 9  provide each parent who requires language assistance services with written notification of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services in the appropriate languages, and instructions on how to obtain such services. Parental notices will be sent in both Spanish and English informing parents of the availability of translation and interpretation services at the school. In addition, a copy of such notification will be posted in a prominent location near the main office. PS 89 translates all information disseminated to families in both English and Spanish. These include welcome letters and supply letters in September, notice of school closings throughout the year, monthly newsletters and events calendars, notice of parent teacher conferences and open school nights in September, November, March and May, notice of promotion in doubt in February, report cards in November, March, and June, NYS assessment results in November, after school program information, announcements regarding monthly school leadership team meetings and the parent-teacher collaborative, announcements regarding monthly parent workshop and family curriculum nights. PS 89 conducts all interactions with families in either English or Spanish, depending on the family's language preference. Since 95% of staff including the parent coordinator, nearly all teacher, the guidance counselor and all administrators are bilingual, these staff work directly with families without an additional interpreter. Face to face meetings include middle school articulation meetings and high school articulation meetings in September, parent teacher conferences and open school nights in September, November, March and May, notice of promotion in doubt in February, band and after school program orientation, monthly school leadership team meetings and the parent-teacher collaborative, monthly parent workshops and family curriculum nights. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish na na 146 586 na na 19.95% 80.05% na na 143 589 na na 19.54% 80.46 na na 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. NA Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 0  1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Welcome Letters September Newsletters Monthly Event Notifications Weekly Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 95% of Staff, including the Parent Coordinator are bilingual and have the capacity to translate all school notifications. 95% of Staff, including the Parent Coordinator are bilingual and have the capacity to translate all school notifications. 95% of Staff, including the Parent Coordinator are bilingual and have the capacity to translate all school notifications. Report Cards November, March, June Download DOE provided translations 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-Teacher Conferences November, February, March, May Curriculum Night December, January, February, March High School Articulation Meetings October Open House September interpretation service(s)? 95% of Staff, including the Parent Coordinator are bilingual and have the capacity to conduct a meeting in both English/Spanish. If a staff member is monolingual, they will be paired with a bilingual colleague. 95% of Staff, including the Parent Coordinator are bilingual and have the capacity to conduct a meeting in both English/Spanish. 95% of Staff, including the Parent Coordinator are bilingual and have the capacity to conduct a meeting in both English/Spanish. 95% of Staff, including the Parent Coordinator are bilingual and have the capacity to conduct a meeting in both English/Spanish. If a staff member is monolingual, they will be paired with a bilingual colleague. 1  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. School Messenger is the school based notification system that provides information to families via a phone call. Communication is provided in both English and Spanish. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. As a school-wide dual language program, the expectation is that all communication is provided in both English and Spanish. Teachers are hired with the knowledge that they have the capacity to communicate in writing and orally in both English and Spanish. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) PS 89 uses the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), as well as conversations with parents to determine the written translation and oral interpretation needs of all families. The school will determine, at the time of enrollment, the primary language spoken by the parent of each student enrolled in the school, and if such language is not English or Spanish, whether the parent requires language assistance in order to communicate effectively with the school. The school shall maintain an appropriate and current record of the primary language of each parent. Such information will be maintained in ATS and on the student emergency card. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Since 95% of staff including the parent coordinator, nearly all teachers, the guidance counselor and all administrators are bilingual, these staff work directly with families without an additional interpreter. Nevertheless, during parent teacher conferences a brief survey will be implemented to gather further data on parental experiences with the quality and availability of school translation services. 2 
