 15K107 School Name: P.S. 107 JOHN W. KIMBALL Principal: EVE LITWACK   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS107 John W. Kimball School 15K107 School Number (DBN): 331500010107 K-5 1301 Eighth Avenue, Brooklyn NY 11215 718-499-2054 Phone Number: 718-499-4019 Fax: Pamela Rosenberg prosenberg@ps107.org Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Eve Litwack Gary DiFranco Amy Weintraub Amy Weintraub N/A N/A N/A Susie Jen District Information Geographical District: 15 Superintendent: Anita Skop Superintendent’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn NY 11201 Superintendent’s Email Address: ASkop@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-935-4317 Fax: 718-935-4356 Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Brooklyn North Executive Director: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn NY 11201   Executive Director’s Email Address: Bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-935-3954 Fax: 718-935-4356   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Eve Litwack Gary DiFranco Amy Weintraub N/A N/A N/A N/A Susie Jen Tamara Chebar Julie Brunner Cross Ariane Rawanduzy Berns Lauren Barkan Nancy Dodd Terri Desai *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement: P.S. 107 is a community school where students grow to become responsible, independent and enthusiastic thinkers who enjoy and value the process of learning. Instruction is centered on the workshop model for literacy and mathematics. The Common Core Standards are the bedrock upon which the curricula is based and are embedded into daily classroom work. Students are encouraged to be thoughtful and creative learners who take responsibility for their own learning. Across the day, they work cooperatively in heterogeneous classrooms, supported by an individualized approach to teaching and learning. In every grade, students publish their own written works and   develop projects in reading, writing, math, science and social studies that demonstrate their growing understanding of the world around them. Students use rubrics and checklist to self-monitor their work. The arts are integrated into this curriculum, both as distinct disciplines of study as well as vehicles for nurturing students’ observation and communication skills. P.S. 107 is strongly committed to promoting and upholding diversity, respect, and inclusiveness within our community. We also strongly advocate for parents to be our educational partners and to serve as a resource to our larger community. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We care deeply about each student’s academic, social and emotional well-being. Here, teachers inspire their students by modeling and by demonstrating their own growth as professionals. P.S. 107 is a ‘bully free’ school where we strive for all children to feel safe and supported by the adults in the school and by each other, making them comfortable taking risks in their learning and developing self-confidence in their peer and adult relationships. In 2016-17 PS107 became a "No Place For Hate" school, adopting five important tenets for a respectful and safe school environment, tenets which are upheld by the entire school community. We strive for P.S. 107 to be a trusting, safe environment where all adults - staff and families - also feel comfortable and supported in taking risks both professionally and personally. Collaboration and partnerships among students, among staff, and between staff, students, and families, is the cornerstone of our work, fundamental to all we do. The school community continuously strives to balance academic rigor and creative instruction with empathy and compassion for the needs of our students, the members of our larger shared community, and the citizens and endangered species of the world. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. School Population: PS107, The John W. Kimball School, has 558 students from Kindergarten through Grade 5. The school population comprises 4% Black, 10% Hispanic, 76% White, and 8% Asian students. The student body includes 2% English language learners and 13% students with disabilities. Boys account for 46% of the students enrolled and girls account for 54%. The average student attendance rate for the school year 2017-18 was 96%. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Areas from the Framework where the most progress was made:  Routine use by teachers of ELA rubrics and checklists as instructional tools and as tools to support student self-assessment  Routine use of various pedagogical structures, such as Station Teaching and parallel teaching, to support Students with Disabilities in ICT classrooms. These structures are used in general education classrooms as well.  Refinement of math curriculum maps and pacing calendars to better account for NYS math emphases and completion of units  Revised Math Benchmark assessments (Grades 1-5) that better reflect the Common Core Learning Standards for mathematics Improved Math instruction using selected Engage NY units in upper grades (3-5)   More teachers (11) attended Responsive Classroom 4-day training and have incorporated taught strategies and activities into their daily practice Key Areas of Focus for 2018-19:  Continue to address the Common Core Learning Standards for mathematics and teacher pedagogy to strengthen and provide more rigorous mathematics instruction to students on all grades  Continue to revise our math curriculum and pacing calendars on Grades K-2 to better reflect the NYS math emphases  Maintain continued expectations that all teachers and paraprofessionals become trained in methodologies that address the social-emotional well-being of our students 0   Identify curricula and read aloud texts related to inclusiveness, respect and tolerance to be incorporated into K-5 Social Studies units and daily Social-Emotional Learning opportunities, lessons, texts, and activities that uphold and deepen our understanding and commitment to the No Place For Hate tenets  Continue to revise and reinforce our Response to Intervention (RTI) structure and improve data collection tools and timing so they are more fully integrated into regular assessment schedules and professional expectations in order to provide students with the greatest needs better support in accessing curricula  Better integrate selected ELA and Social Studies units, providing more opportunities for Project-Based Learning 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 15K107 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 567 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 20 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 14 10 20 20 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 8.0% 6.7% 1.9% % Attendance Rate % Reduced Lunch % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 10.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 73.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.21 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 85.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 100% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A NO NO N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A NO NO N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 57 58 96.2% 0.9% 11.1% 3.7% 9.5% 2.3% 2 14% 8 89.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Overall growth on the 2017-18 NYS Mathematics Exam: INCLUDE RESULTS FROM 2017-18 TEST DATA {remained flat at 84% proficiency in grades 3-5 compared to 83% in 2014-15. Dramatic growth in proficiency was evident between 2013-14 and 2014-15 where overall scores rose 12%, from 71% to 83%. This two year stalled growth in mathematics proficiency, as gauged by the NYS Mathematics Exam, makes it an area of focus for PS107. ] Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will be an increase of 2-5% proficiency in math scores on grades 3-5 as measured by the 2017-18 NYS Mathematics Exam. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. With teachers on grades K-2, work closely with staff developer from Generation Ready to address math emphases gaps in Terc Investigations curriculum and research new lessons and units to be incorporated into existing units to meet that criteria 2. With teachers on K and Lead Math teachers, develop a comprehensive mid- and end-year assessment "interview" for Kindergarten students 3. With teachers on grades 3-5, work closely with G.R. staff developer to better understand the structure of Engage NY math units, identify specific challenge areas for their teaching, and determine methods to address those challenges 4. With G.R. staff developer, enhance existing website of resources to draw upon primarily Eureka/Engage or Investigations 3rd Edition 5. Schedule and attend all meetings with grade level teams and math staff developer, approximately 2 full days per grade across the year 6. Purchase supplemental mathematics materials 7. Revise curriculum maps and pacing calendars accordingly so Emphases are being met 8. With staff developer and teacher teams, identify pedagogical shifts to be made so mathematics instruction incorporates fluency practice and meets higher standards for problem solving 9. Conduct formal or informal observations during math instruction to assess mathematics pedagogy, with student engagement (3c) a primary focus 10. Require Highly Effective teachers to share mathematics practices with other teachers (Option #4) 1. Classroom Teachers , K-2 2. Same as above 3. Classroom teachers, 3-4, and 5th Grade Math Teacher 4. Classroom Teachers, K-5 5. Same as above 6. Same as above 7. Same as above 8. Same as above 9. Same as above 10. Same as above 11. Same as above 12. Same as above 11. With G.R. staff developer and Math Leaders, review 13. Classroom the new comprehensive standards-based benchmark assessments developed in 2017-18 and revise as needed 12. Purchase Grade Cam to score math assessments and more easily collect data Teacher, Gr 1-5 1. Sept-June 2019 2. Oct-May 2019 3. Sept-June 2019 4. Sept-June 2019 5. Sept-June 2019 6. July-Sept 2018 7. June 30 2019 8. Sept-June 2019 9. Oct-May 2019 10. Nov-May 2019 11. Sept-June 2019 12. Feb-June 2019 1. Principal, AP 2. Principal, AP 3. Principal, AP 4. Principal, AP 5. Principal, AP, Math Lead Teachers 6. Principal, AP, Math Lead Teachers 7. Principal, AP, Math Lead Teachers 8. Principal, AP 9. Principal, AP 10. Principal, AP, Classroom Teachers rated HE 11. Principal, AP, Math Lead Teachers 12. Principal, AP 13. Principal, AP, Math Lead Teachers 4  13. With Grade Teams and Math Leaders, review Benchmark Math assessment results and use that data to determine next steps for instruction 13. Feb-May 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be informed of work with staff developer and progress in mathematics in the following ways:  Monthly Family Letter from Principal (Principal)  Beginning Year and End Year grade specific meetings with Principal (Principal)  Monthly PTA Meetings, Principal & SLT Reports (Principal, SLT member)    Parent-Teacher Conferences (Principal, AP, Teachers)  Monthly School Leadership Team Meetings and published minutes from meeting (SLT Members) September Curriculum Night (Principal, AP, Teachers) June Curriculum Night (Principal, AP, Teachers) 5   Family Math Workshop with staff developer (Principal, AP, Generation Ready staff developer) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources Used to Achieve Goal:  PTA and School budget to hire Generation Ready staff developer for a minimum of 12 days      School budget to hire per diem teachers (substitutes) for classroom coverage during staff development work School budget to purchase Engage Units, Terc 3 teaching guides, and associated student workbooks Scheduling of staff developer for teacher meetings and parent workshop Formal and informal grade meetings (Monthly/Weekly) to review curriculum and student work Scheduling of grade level planning days to incorporate curriculum changes and supplemental materials, design and modify lessons, and build more rigorous benchmark assessments  Observation feedback shared with teachers by Principal and AP Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress will be monitored in the following ways, at the following points:  Informal feedback on mathematics work from parents and teachers: Principal Meetings (with parents) in Sept-Oct and May-June; Monthly School Leadership Team Meetings (parents & teachers), and formal grade level meetings (monthly) Formal feedback from staff developer: debrief after each meeting with teachers   DOE School Survey (when available)  After January benchmark assessment data is entered into Grade Cam (Jan and May 2019) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The specific Instrument(s) used to assess progress:  Revised January & June benchmark mathematics assessments (grades 1-5)  2018-19 NYS Mathematics Exam (grades 3-5)  Measures of Teacher Learning ratings in math observations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? On-going changes to the PS107 demographics and its surrounding neighborhood have resulted in reduced ethnic, racial and socio-economic diversity. This has caused concerns, particularly for our families of color in that there are fewer peer- and role- models with whom their children can identify. Although the 2016-17 School Survey indicates that 92% of parents who responded believe the school works hard to "build trusting relationships with parents/guardians like them," our School Leadership Team and Diversity Committee conversations reflect that this may not entirely be the case. We all agree that more work must be done to build greater sensitivity, tolerance, and empathy, and promote deeper personal reflection among our students, staff and families about the divisive issues in today's world that foster hatred and bias. We cannot allow hateful thinking to penetrate the walls of our school or the minds of our children and community. In 2016-17 PS107 adopted the Anti-Defamation League's "No Place For Hate" program throughout the school which has been a focal point for the work of our Diversity Committee. The program calls for at least three school-wide "activities" to be administered in the school year in order to qualify as a NPFH school. This program has created an important framework for our diversity themes. Our School Leadership Team and wider school community deeply values the NPFH program and the work of the Diversity Committee. We are committed to carrying that work forward and deepening it to underscore the critical need for empathy, tolerance, respect, inclusiveness and kindness in the world we live in. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of PS107 students will participate in 2-4 periods of teacher-guided "book talk" conversations in their classrooms that are related to read aloud texts selected and purchased by the Diversity Committee that will address diversity of all kinds, including, but not limited to race, ethnicity, socio-economic status, and gender equality. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Principal, School Leadership Team and members 1. Classroom from the Diversity Committee (PTA sub-group) meet to set target dates for First Fridays and other activities, to select focus topic for the year and to set additional school-wide goals (e.g., turnkey of Border Crossers training, resources for support curricula) 2. Librarian and Diversity Committee members to select read aloud texts and create conversation and activity guides 3. PTA/Diversity Committee to purchase read aloud texts for distribution 4. First Friday family No Place For Hate activities to be implemented 5. Monthly NPFH/Teaching Tolerance activities or lessons to be implemented 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers 2. Classroom Teachers 3. Classroom Teachers 4. Families & Classroom Teachers 5. Classrooms Teachers 1. June -Sept 2018 2. Sept 2018 3. Oct 2018 4. Nov 2018 5. Oct-June 2018 1. Principal, AP & DIversity Committee (Parents, Teachers and Admin 2. Librarian & Diversity Committee 3. PTA / Diversity Committee 4. Principal, AP 5. Principal, AP, Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. PS107 will support families in understanding this goal in the following ways:  Monthly Family Letter from Principal that refers to the Diversity work (Principal)  Selected "First Friday" events specifically organized around a Diversity issue and activity (Principal, Diversity Committee, Teachers)  Parent workshop(s) by members of Diversity Committee to turnkey Border Crossers training  Beginning Year and End Year grade specific Meetings with Principal with details about this work (Principal)  Monthly PTA Meetings, Principal & SLT Reports (Principal, SLT members)  Teacher members of the Diversity Committee to share effects of this work on students (Teachers)  Monthly School Leadership Team Meetings and published minutes from meeting (Principal & SLT Members) 8  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources Used to Achieve Goal:  PTA budget to fund purchase of Diversity read aloud texts  Librarian/Diversity Committee member to advise on selection of texts and to create Conversation & Activity Guides for use with selected texts  Diversity Committee representative member on School Leadership Team  Diversity topics on agenda for each School Leadership Team meeting  With administrative cabinet, review teacher and parent feedback immediately following teacher & parent workshops  Discuss staff feedback on Diversity read aloud texts and activities and teacher workshops  School Aides, Guidance Counselor, AP and Principal to monitor and respond to student interactions during lunch-recess periods Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Parent and Teacher feedback from classroom activities and read aloud texts will be collected and discussed in School Leadership Team meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Informal feedback data collected from the teachers and parents shared with school administration, parents, the SLT, or Diversity committee will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2016-17 School Quality report indicates that 86% of teachers who responded felt that overall, "their professional development experiences this year have been sustained and coherently focused, rather than short-term and unrelated." Likewise 91% of teachers felt that "overall their professional development experiences this year have included opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school." While grade teams have the benefit of lunch periods and weekly common preps to collaborate on lesson planning, there are fewer opportunities for cross-grade collaborations so that teachers and paraprofessionals can learn together and from each other. Therefore, it is essential that these are built into the professional learning calendar. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 100% of teachers and paraprofessionals will have participated in a vertically-organized professional learning community, meeting a minimum of 5 Mondays across the year. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Establish cross-grade Vertical Teams composed 1. Teachers and of teachers, admin, and paraprofessionals Paras 2. Purchase professional book to launch Vertical 2. Teachers,Paras teamwork for first 2-3 meetings 3. Schedule monthly or back-to-back Vertical Team meetings on Mondays on month-by-month Professional Learning calendar & Admin 3. Teachers,Paras & Admin 4. Teachers,Paras 4. Establish facilitator and group protocols for V.T. & Admin meetings 5. Teachers,Paras 5. Provide feedback/reporting form to Vertical & Admin Teams after each meeting to share with administration the topics discussed and strategies implemented with students 6. Vertical Teams determine Inquiry topic(s) for meetings in second half of year and develop plan, time-line and goal for the focus topic 6. Teachers,Paras & Admin 1. Sept-June 2019 2. Sept 2018 3. Sept-June 2019 4. Jan-June 2019 1. Principal, AP 2. Principal, AP 3. Principal, AP 4. Principal, AP 5. Principal, AP, V.T. Facilitators 6. Principal, AP, V.T. Facilitators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PS107 will support families in understanding this goal in the following ways:  Monthly School Leadership Team meetings and published minutes from those meetings (SLT)  Monthly Family Letter from Principal outlining the work (Principal)  Beginning Year and End Year grade specific Meetings with Principal with details about this work (Principal)  Curriculum Conferences with Families (Teachers)  Monthly PTA Meetings, Principal & SLT Reports (Principal, SLT member) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1  Resources Used to Achieve Goal:  PTA or school budget to purchase professional texts  Principal creates Vertical Teams that have balanced upper/lower grade representatives as well as paraprofessionals, out-of-classroom teachers, and administrators  Principal develops Monthly Professional Learning calendar with schedule for Vertical Team meetings; PL Team reviews calendar prior to staff distribution  Principal develops response form and guidelines for teamwork  Teachers/Paraprofessional facilitators monitor guidelines and keep group on pace  Teacher/Para recorder takes notes and submits to Principal after each meeting  PTA or school budget purchase additional professional texts or other resources as needed and as determined by Vertical Teams for Jan-June Inquiry work Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress will be monitored in January after the first round of V.T. meetings, through an informal survey of staff. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A survey of professional learning, including Vertical Teamwork, will be issued to staff members in the mid-year (Feb) to assess attitudes and progress toward team goals. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the 2016-17 School Survey, 81% of teachers responded that "a lot or all of the adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities." In addition, only 76% of teacher respondents felt that "a lot or all of the adults at their school teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior." These results indicate a need to continue our efforts for all teachers and support staff to be trained to address the social-emotional needs of our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of classroom teachers will be trained in Responsive Classroom or Restorative Circles and will incorporate these techniques into daily classroom practice as seen through formal and informal observations and as gathered informally in mid-year and summative teacher conferences. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. With PTA, determine annual budget allowance for 1. Classroom Responsive Classroom teacher training 2. Request volunteers or assign teachers to attend R.C. training 3. Conduct classroom observations during morning meeting and at other times when R.C. activities and strategies are taking place 4. Provide planning time for R.C. trained teachers to collaborate to plan turnkey training for teachers not already trained 5. Use Monday Professional Learning periods for R.C. trained staff to turnkey highlights of their training 6. With Guidance Counselor, plan Family workshop to share R.C. techniques Teachers 2. Classroom or Cluster Teachers 3. Classroom & Cluster Teachers 4. Classroom & Cluster Teachers 5. All Staff 6. Families 1. Principal, PTA President, Treasurer 2. Principal, AP 3. Principal, AP 4. Principal 5. Principal, AP 6. Principal, Ap 1. June-Sept 2018 2. Sept-June 2019 3. Oct-May 2019 4. Oct-Feb 2019 5. Oct-Feb 2019 6. Jan-Feb 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PS107 will support families in understanding this goal in the following ways:  Reference to R.C. trainings as relevant in monthly Family Letter (Principal)  Reference to trainings and purpose of trainings as relevant in annual Principal-Parent Meetings (Principal)  Monthly School Leadership Team meetings and published minutes from those meetings (SLT)  Monthly PTA Meetings, Principal & SLT Reports (Principal, SLT member) 4   Family workshop conducted by Guidance Counselor and Principal Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources Used to Achieve Goal:  PTA funds to pay for Responsive Classroom trainings  Selected Monday Professional Development sessions for trained staff to turnkey key components and "take aways" from R.C. trainings Informal and formal classroom observations to assess effectiveness of R.C. strategies and activities Feedback from teachers on R.C. training    Guidance Counselor awareness and alignment to R.C. expectations and strategies Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, in mid-year teacher meetings, review observation feedback as it pertains to R.C. strategies and activities, and overall responsiveness to students' social-emotional needs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. General classroom observations and teacher feedback on techniques that have supported student needs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2016-17 School Survey indicated that 86% of parents/guardians who responded felt that they "are invited to visit classrooms to observe instruction," and 88% felt that "teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs." These two sub-categories in the "Strong Family and Community Ties" section of the School Survey received the lowest scores. Likewise, only 91% of parents/guardians who responded felt that "they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance sometimes or often." In conversations with the parents on the School Leadership Team there is a desire on the part of our parent population for more information about the school's internal systems, curricula, and the supports and services available to students. These areas must be enhanced to build stronger parent/guardian-teacher-student relationships across the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS107 staff and administration will provide 3-5 family workshops, information letters, FAQ documents, and other resources related to curriculum and instruction, Next Generation learning standards, social-emotional supports, Response to Intervention information and supports, and special education services, to educate and inform parents about school level and DOE policies. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. In Summer 2018 in consultations with AP, PTA president, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, IEP-Special Education Teacher Lead, and Math Lead Teachers schedule tentative dates for parent workshops for the 2018-19 school year 2. Collect feedback from parents during Principal-Parent meetings in early fall and from members of the School Leadership Team regarding the perceived needs of families to be used to plan family workshops. 3. Parent Coordinator to publish all workshop dates on Konstella calendar (web-based communication platform) for parent and teacher access 4. With Parent Coordinator, create and distribute family flyers for each of the workshops 5. Schedule the workshops and develop agendas 6. Provide feedback sheets for each workshop and review them, so there is an on-going loop of communication about parent needs 7. Email power point presentations from each workshop to parents on the applicable grade(s) 8. Follow up with School Leadership Team on efficacy of workshops and for further parent feedback 1. Principal, AP, Parent Coordinator 2. Principal, AP 3. Principal, Parent Coordinator 4. Principal, Parent Coordinator 5. Principal 6. Principal 7. Parent Coordinator 8. Principal, SLT 1. PS107 Families 2. PS107 Families 3. PS107 Families & Teachers 4. PS107 Families 5. PS107 Families 6. PS107 Families 7. PS107 Families 8. PS107 Families & SLT 1. June-Sept 2018 2. Oct-Dec 2018 3. Sept-June 2019 4. Sept-June 2019 5. Sept-June 2019 6. Sept-June 2019 7. Sept-June 2019 8. Sept-June 2019 7  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. PS107 will support families in understanding this goal in the following ways: FAQ documents and informational letters backpacked or emailed to families  3-5 parent workshops during the year; feedback sheets for each workshop   Monthly School Leadership Team meetings and published minutes from those meetings (SLT)  Monthly Family Letter from Principal outlining the work (Principal)  Beginning Year and End Year grade specific meetings with Principal with details about this work (Principal)  Monthly PTA Meetings, Principal & SLT Reports (Principal, SLT member) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources Used to Achieve Goal: Summer planning meeting for workshops (Principal, Guidance Counselor, Mental Health Liaison)   Konstella web-based communications platform (PTA)  All workshop presenters to create power point presentations (Principal or other presenter) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By End September 2018, tentative dates for all family workshops  Two weeks prior to each workshop date, hard copy of workshop flyer to be backpacked home  One week prior to each workshop date, Konstella email notice to be sent to specific grade level (or other) families Feedback to be collected and reviewed at end of each workshop Feedback to be reviewed with Cabinet at weekly meeting    Overall feedback to be reviewed with School Leadership Team, and additional feedback to be solicited  Determinations to be made in mid-year about planning for additional workshops on other topics Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Workshop feedback to be analyzed by Cabinet, PTA and workshop presenters within one week of each workshop. Anecdotal feedback collected and shared by School Leadership Team at monthly meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Prior student data on progress and reading level; On-Demand Written assignments; TCRWP Reading Records; Spellling Inventory Speaking & Listening Skills Classroom quizzes , exit slips, and other informal and formal assessments; Two benchmark math assessments for all grade, administered in January and end May; Early Childhood Mathematics Assessment (ECAM) for children with specific needs Science exit slips; in-class work; collaboration with peers; homework; notebook work, formal assessments Informal and formal writing assignments; Reading proficiency on Nonfictiontexts; Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Guided and Repeated Readings; Leveled Literacy Intervention; Intervention by Design; Guided and Interactive instruction in writing; Fundations, Wilson, or Orton-Gillingham instruction; Checklists and rubrics Guided math instruction with existing mathematics program on current grade level; Individualized math instruction with existing math program on previous year’s grade level; Use ECAM assessment to deterimine “gap” areas for instruction; Rubrics Repeated reading and instruction; Partner support; Graphic organizers; Modified curricula; Checklists and rubrics Repeated readings and instruction; Modified curricula and texts; When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) All services provided during the school day All services provided during the school day Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group instruction with classroom teacher; Individualized instruction with classroom teacher; Small group instruction with Literacy Intervention Teachers Small group instruction with classroom teacher; Individualized instruction with classroom teacher Small group instruction with the science teacher; Individualized instruction with science teacher Small group instruction with classroom teacher; All services provided during the school day All services provided during the school day 9 Graphic Organizers Checklists and rubrics Counseling and play therapy Individualized instruction with classroom teacher At Risk Counseling Services provided in one-to-one or small group settings All services provided during the school day At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Collaborate with peers; Homework and in-class assignments Ability to self-regulate behaviors both in the classroom and out-of-classroom; Family dynamics and perceived need for support; Information about the student from the classroom teacher and informal observations of the student 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We have no STH students currently We have no STH students currently Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We have no STH students currently 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  We have no STH students currently 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We have no STH student currently 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 3  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). ● New Kindergarten Family Breakfast (in June prior to Kindergarten) ● New Families Welcome Breakfast (First day of school in September) ● Kindergarten Family orientation meeting (First week of school: Co-sponsored by principal and PTA) ● Curriculum Night (September) * Kindergarten Volunteers training workshop (September) ● Kindergarten classroom curriculum conferences (September) ● Kindergarten Family Meeting with the Principal (September & May) ● Informal Kindergarten screenings by OT & Speech teachers (October) ● Guidance Counselor and Social Worker support for K students who have trouble assimilating to school routines (as needed) ● Response to Intervention (RTI) Team support for K teachers with struggling students 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Tax Levy (FSF) Local N/A N/A N/A 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 5   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S.107 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S.107 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality 7  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 8  ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S.107, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 9  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 0  ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 15 School Name John W. Kimball Learning Center Borough Brooklyn School Number 107 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Eve Litwack Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Margaret Galella Teacher/Subject Area n/a Teacher/Subject Area n/a Related-Service Provider Sarah Hunt Superintendent Anita Skop Assistant Principal Pascale Pradel Coach N/A School Counselor Sarah Green Parent Leigh Smith Parent Coordinator (Vacant Position) Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 568 2 Total number of ELLs 11 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.94%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use TCRWP for all assessments of early literacy skills for our ELLs. We also utilize teacher made assessments. For grades 3, 4 and 5, we incorporate results from Predictive tests (sample NYS tests) to help us modify our teaching to the ELLs who are scheduled to take these tests. These are given one month prior to the spring NYS Tests. The Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI) program is used by teachers for Academic Instructional Support. All assessments are used to inform teacher classroom practice and to target areas of need. Our ELLs make great progress throughout the year, based on results from these assessments. On average, our non-English reading ENL students progress up to four levels in just one year. This information helps our teachers to stay focused for the language achievement of the ELLs. It also provides teachers with areas of need for the ELLs so that targeted instruction can take place. For example one of our students, a Fourth Grade ELL student grew from Level A (September 2016) to a Level S (June 2017). Our Kindergarten ELL students were a Pre-Emergent level (September 2016) and are now currently Level E, which 3  is on grade level for First Grade. This trend is typical of the ESL students at our school. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? All classroom teachers receive on-going professional development with a Teachers College staff developer who helps them implement the reading and writing units of study in a coherent method and provides tangible ways for them to differentiate for their ELLs and other struggling or advanced students. In math, all classroom teachers work closely with a staff developer from Generation Ready who likewise provides resources and methods to help them provide targeted instruction to their ELLs and other students who need further differentiation. Weekly grade level meetings during common preps allow teachers to focus on the needs of their ELLs and other students so that lessons and units are modified accordingly. Teachers work closely with the ENL teacher during the weekly Tuesday afternoon professional development time. Monday afternoon professional development sessions with the ENL teacher help all classroom teachers explore resources and identify instructional methods to support their ELL students that can be implemented in their classrooms. The ENL teacher works directly throughout the week with all classroom teachers who have an ELL student, providing daily oral feedback and bi-monthly written feedback. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The ESL and other various programs for ELLs is very successful. Most students move between 4 to 6 reading levels during their first year. The majority of our ELLs score out of the ESL program within 2 to 3 years of service. After they score out of the program, the ELLs generally score a 3 or 4 on the ELA standardized state and city tests. Our ELL population is successful in attaining their second language. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ENL teacher and classroom teachers meet during Tuesday afternoon professional development time to review and discuss summative assessment results and current progress for our ELLs. Depending on her availability, the ENL teacher may occasionally join a grade level meeting to discuss ELL progress. Grade level meetings are held weekly during the teachers' common prep period. Similar to our RTI program, the teachers collaborate to determine the areas of need and work together to tailor instruction and develop tasks that address those specific needs. Interventions that are no longer necessary or effective based on the data, are eliminated and replaced with others that will address the gaps in understanding seen in the summative data. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] In regards to our RTI program for our ELLs, we look at many components to scaffold each student's language development: language modalities, preferential seating, texts with picture support, kinesthetic TPR, and whether the room is labeled with common vocabulary words. Our school has an active RTI Team that addresses behavior, academic, and social issues for all students. Teachers use a checklist to provide interventions for students with needs and students who do not make adequate progress, and these students are discussed with the RTI Team, resulting in an individualized program for the student. The RTI liaison for the grade works closely with the ENL teacher and the classroom teacher to ensure student success. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data patterns across performance levels on the NYSITELL show that most of the children who take the NYSITELL score out of this assessment. This means that most of our children entering our school are already bilingual. The portions of children who do not score out of the NYSITELL have a low intermediate level of English. We use the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT subgroups to target individual instruction for our ELLs. 4  Data patterns in proficiency levels on the NYSESLAT show that most of our children score out of the ENL program within 3 to 4 years. The pattern suggests that each year the ELL students progress one level each year in their language acquisition. Most children are in need of more instruction in writing, reading and listening. Most children are competent in the speaking modality on the NYSESLAT. Our ELLs typically score high (80% +) on the Reading and Speaking modality on the NYSESLAT . For the Listening and Writing modalities, they generally scored lower (60% or less) . 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL teacher meets regularly with classroom teachers to discuss their ELL student's progress and to identify areas where more focus is needed based on formative and summative data. Additionally, the ENL teacher provides professional development for the staff to disseminate NYSESLAT and NYSITELL data and long term trends in this data. The ENL teacher meets with the parents of ELLs on an as-needed basis, but also during Tuesday afternoon Parent Engagement periods and Parent-Teacher conferences and Curriculum Nights, to share areas where progress has been made, to provide resources and recommendations to address gap areas, and to outline the anticipated trajectory for future progress. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 1. a. Instruction is delivered either through a pull-out program as a self-contained free standing ESL program or a push-in program. In the pull-out model the ENL teachers works with students in the school library or other available space. She provides students with notebooks and workbooks to record their work. In the push-in model, the ENL teacher sits side-by-side with the student(s) in their classroom during regular classroom instruction. The ENL teacher may bring additional materials to supplement the instruction, based on her planning with the classroom teacher. The ENL teacher scaffolds the instruction and assignments to ensure a clear understanding. 1. b. For our Kindergarten ESL program, we follow a heterogeneous mix of proficiency levels. For our Third Grade ESL program, we follow a homogenous model where the students are on the same proficiency level. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A; school does not offer a TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A; school does not offer a DL program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL Teacher compiles a schedule for all ELL students that ensures they get the mandated minutes of ENL instruction per week. This schedule is distributed to classroom teachers, the principal, the assistant principal, the SETSS teacher, and other service providers such as OT and PT teachers. a. All beginner and intermediate English Language Learners receive 360 minutes a week of ESL instruction. Our advanced learners receive 180 minutes of instruction. The ENL Teacher usually conducts her ESL lessons for the mandated children 5  during the school's literacy time, which starts at 9:10 to 10:00 am every morning, as well as conducting lessons during our embedded AIS, which is twice a week (on Mondays and Wednesdays) for 45 minutes each time, usually at mid-day, around 10:45 am. The five proficiency levels for ELLs are entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding and commanding. Per week, entering ELL students receive 2 units of ENL study, 2 units of stand alone ENL, 1 unit of integrated ENL /ELA for a total of 360 minutes per week. Per week, emerging ELL students receive 2 units of study, .5 units fo stand-alone in ENL, 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA and .5 unit of study in either stand-alone ENL or integrated ENL/Content area for a total of 360 minutes per week. Per week, transitioning ELLs receive 1 unit of ENL, .5 unit of student in integrated ENL, .5 units of stand-alone ENL or integrated ENL/Content area for a total of 180 minutes. Per week, expanding ELLs receive 1 unit of ENL, 1 unit of integrated ENL for a total of 180 minutes per week. Per week, Commanding ELLs receive .5 unit of study in integrated ENL or ELA or content area. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teacher conducts similar classroom mini-lessons during ELLs' reading periods. The ENL teacher also includes reading of non-fiction materials such as science and social studies as part of the ENL curriculum. The ENL teacher continues to conduct lessons in math (usually as a warm-up lesson) within the allotted mandated minutes for the ELLs. The ENL Teacher will push-in during content area instruction. ENL curriculum maps are aligned to literacy maps on all grades, which are aligned to the Common Core Standards. During teaching of the content areas, the ENL Teacher will support the ELLs by providing bilingual dictionaries that will help support vocabulary through their native language to acquire new words in their new language. If possible, we ask for assistance from our teachers that speak similar languages to the ELLs for translations of specific words or concepts in the content area. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The ENL Teacher screens the materials from the home country's schools, such as report cards and letters from school administrators to evaluate their native language. The ENL Teacher interviews and screens parents about the school system in their native country and what type of student their child was. The ENL Teacher also runs reports on the ATS to view the results of the Spanish NYSITELL, to review which language the child is dominant in. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The ENL teacher often has to differentiate instruction within the ELL subgroups. The teacher often does partner work, partnering a newcomer with an advanced level ELL. All ELLs and former ELLs (up to two years after they score out of the NYSESLAT) receive testing accommodations of separate location and time and half to complete the tests. A. Our school usually does not have SIFE students. But if we do, the RTI Team has a plan set in place for the SIFE students. The ENL teacher will confer with the RTI Team to plan according lessons with SIFE students, like providing review language lessons during our embedded AIS program. We also have students participate in an At-Risk program with the SETSS teacher. B.The ENL teacher spends the first six weeks with newcomers reviewing survival and safety skills. This helps the students feel comfortable and establish a personal and trusting relationship with the ENL teacher. After the students feel comfortable with daily routines, the ENL teacher starts to align their language development with ELA lessons. These lessons resemble what is being taught in the general classroom, with more emphasis on vocabulary work. 6  C.The ENL Teacher places ELL students into a push-in program so that the student does not lose instructional time from the general classroom. At this point of service, the student needs to remain in the classroom but also needs the extra support that the ESL teacher gives, like explaining idioms, grammar points, etc. D. Students that have been receiving ENL services for more than 6 years are generally not in our school. E. ELLs students with 1-2 years proficiency receive extended time for tests (including state tests). The reading intervention teacher also services those students as needed. These students receive .5 unit in ENL integrated or content area per week. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our school was recently awarded a Title III grant for our ENL program. We used the grant in part to purchase Rigby's "On Our Way to English" series, which includes Common Core aligned guided reading books and benchmark assessments. The series also includes content-area selections in math, science and social studies. On Our Way to English is a program designed specifically for Grades Kindergarten to 5th Grade, perfect for our elementary school ENL students. We are also using Rigby's PM Books. These titles are known for their clear climax and resolution, real story lines and steady growth of sentence structure with easily scaffolded text for reading success among our ELLs. These materials will help our ELLs by providing a rich vocabulary through high picture support, as well as providing sequential story elements and inferential questioning. When using the guided reading portion of the On Our Way to English, the ENL Teacher can easily group her ELL students according to level of language acquisition. For example, we group together children who are struggling with prediction, we can use the books and work on specific targeted instruction. The ENL Teacher uses repetition for grammar points and lots of visuals to support vocabulary acquisition when working with ELL-SWDs. The ENL teacher confers with the SETSS teacher and the Special Education teacher to help ELL students with special needs. These teachers meet once a week and give each other strategies that will help these students. When we have ELL students with IEPs, the ENL Teacher logs onto SESIS and reviews their IEP, which helps create the goals specific for these students. The ENL Teacher meets weekly with the ICT Teacher or the SETSS Teacher or with a service provider and reviews the ELLs' goals that are listed on the IEP. Together they create weekly and daily goals for the students as well. The ENL Teacher will also be active on the Student Based Support Team as well as part of the IEP meetings. The ENL teacher reviews the IEPs on the SESIS and signs a 408 form indicating that she has read and understands the needs of the ELL-SWDs. The ENL Teacher will also seek out any service provider for more information about the child or to share best practices with them. All ELL-SWDs who have IEPs receive mandated ESL instruction and the IEP is first adhered to, then the ENL mandates are met. Our school has a subscription to BrainPop ESL. The username and password are shared with ELL families to continue their language learning at home through technology. Every classroom in our building is equipped with SmartBoard technology which helps the ELLs learn through multi-sensory applications, which is a great way to learn the language. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Using a flexible scheduling format, the ENL Teacher will push-in during ELA and content areas for ELLs-SWD to achieve their IEP goals. The ENL Teacher will modify curriculum by using visuals, and using multi-sensory and language enriched lessons. The criteria to placing ELLs-SWD is that their disability is prohibiting them from reaching Common Core benchmarks and with the use of the ICT Teacher and other service providers and the ENL Teacher, the ELLs-SWD can master the curriculum. The criteria would be difficult in mastering the Common Core curriculum without the mandated Special Education services and ESL services. Our school ensures that ELL students receive maximum time with non-ELLs by using the flexible time as a time to 7  push in during science classes or social studies classes. These classes are project-based and the ENL Teacher ensures that the ELL is a part of the group of native speakers. The school uses a variety of instructional tools, such as the use of technology like the Smart Board, the Elmo and computers, as well as computer programs, such as Scholastic's video center, as resources for the ELL-SWDs to guide them to standard grade level. Our school schedule has built in an extra period a week where the ENL Teacher and the Special Education teachers meet together to discuss progress and teaching strategies for the ELL-SWDs. The administration has a weekly meeting with our Special Education Teachers, the ENL Teacher, the Guidance Counselor, the Social Worker, Assistant Principal and the SETSS teachers to brainstorm strategies for our ELL-SWDs. ELL-SWDs are placed in the ICT class based on recommendations from the IEP and SETSS teachers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We know our ENL students need an intervention because we have Common Core benchmarks that need to be met. For example, if an ENL student is a level A in First Grade in November, the classroom teacher has a meeting with the ENL Teacher and administration, as well as the RTI Team to determine what intervention programs and services are available for that student. The ELL students are a part of several intervention programs. The students are a part of our AIS program; all of our teachers that deliver this program during two periods a week. During this AIS, the entire school is a part of a literacy AIS program. Each teacher in our building works with a small group of students (about 4 to 6 students in the group) additional instruction in both Math and ELA. The ELLs are also a part of this AIS program. The ELLs also have access to the library three times a week; once during their allotted library class time and two other times during Open Access. Open Access is a time when students can return books and borrow new books from our school library. The school also has a very successful after school program that offers homework help and lots of other enrichment programs: chess, karate, piano, writing plays, dance. An after school scholarship program is available for families who qualify. We see our ELL students, in addition to the mandated time, twice a week for the embedded AIS periods. We usually meet with the students on Mondays and Wednesdays. We also utilize At-Risk Services provided by our SETSS Teacher. At-Risk services are provided on Thursdays and Fridays by the SETSS Teacher. If the interventions do not work, the RTI team discusses possible need for a formal evaluation which may lead to Special Education services. Our intervention for Social Studies and Science classes is to have the ENL Teacher use the flexible mandated time to push-in to this class and support the ELL with scaffolding TESOL methodologies. The ENL Teacher uses native language interventions such as using bilingual dictionaries or using Google Translate to see both home language word and the English word translation. This is often used in content areas. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our after school program has many new programs offered this year, including chorus, theater, dance, karate, movement and yoga. During school we also offer swim program for 2 nd graders, music and dance for Kindergarten, yoga for First Grade, African Dance for Third Graders, Ballroom Dancing for 4 th Graders and Creative Stages' Shakespeare for 5 th Grade. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Currently we have no plans to discontinue any of our ELL programs. 8  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our PTA generously provides scholarship funds to our ELL students for the after school program. Most of our ELL families take advantage of this scholarship fund. If a family does not take part in the scholarship fund, the ESL teacher will seek out the family to ensure that they understand the scholarship fund and after school program. Classroom teachers also seek out the PTA to help these families (if they qualify) to support enrichment programs such as 5th Grade Ashokan Center environmental Trip, 4th Grade Ballroom Dancing competitions, and various theater acts for all grades held at New Victory Theater in Times Square. All ELLs participate in every activity or school program. No one is left out. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The ENL teacher uses the computer and the Internet to enhance ESL instruction. The ENL Teacher uses a Rigby Guided Reading program that has various reading genres included (fiction, nonfiction, science, and social studies). For our Kindergarten Grade ESL subgroup, the ENL teacher uses the Rigby Guided Reading program as well as Smart Board technology (utilizing several Internet programs like Brain Pop and Starfall) to promote reading. The ENL teacher uses I-Pads for vocabulary enrichment for both First Grade students and Fourth Grade students. The First Grade students also use Brain Pop for math instruction. For our Fourth Grade ESL subgoup, the ENL teacher uses the Rigby Guided Reading program as well as Smart Board technology (utilizing internet programs like Professor Garfield (reading comprehension, sequencing and inferencing) and Khan Academy and Dreambox (for math). We also utilize bilingual dictionaries, student teachers who speak the native language to help our ELLs and their instruction in their new language. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our ESL program provides instruction in English. The ENL teacher celebrates the students home languages by asking for translations of the vocabulary words in their first language and then providing the same vocabulary word in English. The ENL teacher uses cognates from both languages to assure literacy comprehension and inclusion of the Native Language. Our school library provides several native language books in Spanish, German, French, Dutch, Chinese and Bengali for continued literacy of the Native Language at home. The ENL teacher organizes peer buddy system that pairs up students learning English with students who speak fluent English and share their native language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Support and resources are determined by grade level and age appropriate materials. For example, kindergarten students may trace their bodies to learn vocabulary while a newcomer in 4th grade may label a photo of a human body. We use Rigby's "Intervention by Design" program for ELA and Rigby's Lighthouse book series as well. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The ENL teacher uses the computer and the Internet to enhance ESL instruction. The ENL Teacher uses a Rigby Guided Reading program that has various reading genres included (fiction, nonfiction, science, and social studies). For our Kindergarten Grade ESL subgroup, the ENL teacher uses the Rigby Guided Reading program as well as Smart Board technology (utilizing several Internet programs like Brain Pop and Starfall) to promote reading. The ENL teacher uses I-Pads for vocabulary enrichment for both First Grade students and Fourth Grade students. The First Grade students also use Brain Pop for math instruction. For our Fourth Grade ESL subgoup, the ENL teacher uses the Rigby Guided Reading program as well as Smart Board technology (utilizing Internet programs like Professor Garfield (reading comprehension, sequencing and inferencing) and Khan Academy and Dreambox (for math). We also utilize bilingual dictionaries, student teachers who speak the native language to help our ELLs and their instruction in their new language. 9  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our very active PTA hosts a Newcomers Breakfast for our families. There are numerous special events, also hosted by the PTA, which include a celebration of the many cultures that make up the school (such as Heritage Day, Art Day and Science Day) and all families are welcome. Staff that is involved with these activities are administrators , parent coordinator, ENL Teacher, Science Teacher, Art Teacher , Music Teacher and classroom teachers. The principal also has a grade-by-grade coffee meeting with parents in September, where parents are invited to mingle, meet the principal, and to ask and get answers to their questions. All notifications of these events are provided in the parents' preferred language. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? During school hours we are not able to offer a foreign language. Our after school offers Chinese language enrichment program. Any ELL can attend this program. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We do not have a dual language program at our school. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. The ENL Teacher/bilingual /ESL Coordinator receives 3 to 4 professional training days throughout the school year. These are sponsored by the Field Support Center and the Central Board of Education. Additionally, the ENL teacher may also attend special summer professional development workshops sponsored by private organizations, funded by the PTA. The ENL Teacher as well as the classroom teachers of the ELLs attend some of the FSC or Board sponsored PDs. The Assistant Principal receives yearly professional development for ELLs at her district PDs for AP support group. Common Branches teacher, subject area teachers and paraprofessionals receive 9 hours of PD for ELLs conducted on Election and Chancellor's Day conducted by the ENL Teacher. The ENL teacher receives training in the Common Core Standards at the school level, through faculty and other grade level meetings. in looking at our Literacy curriculum and the Instructional Shifts the ENL teacher incorporates a variety of nonfiction literature, including "how to" books and "all about" books in her teaching along with an emphasis on social studies skills, such as map reading and comparing and contrasting cultures of the world. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL teacher researches surrounding middle schools to see which schools will accommodate our ELL population. The suggestions are then given to the classroom teachers as well as to the parents of the ELLs. The ENL teacher has also arranged 0  tours for prospective ELL parents to various participating middle school. The Guidance Counselor attends professional development workshops about the middle school process as well assists in making arrangements for families to tour middle schools. During professional development days, such as Election day or Chancellor's Day, and our Monday professional sessions, the ENL Teacher will hold training for staff on such topics as TESOL Methodologies to be used in the general classroom. Specifically, the ENL teacher provides the teachers with lessons on TPR (total physical response) for children who arrive at the school with no English skills; the ENL teacher also advises teachers on how to create a positive relationship with ELL parents; provides specific strategies to teachers to help support ELL students within the classroom, for example, scaffolding, labeling the room, pairing up students who may have similar home languages. Specific activities include how to introduce vocabulary to the ELLs, how to scaffold content area for the ELLs and how to informally assess ELLs on daily basis. The ENL Teacher maintains records by having teachers who attend the PDs sign in. After the PDs, the ENL teacher surveys the teachers for feedback. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teacher schedules individual conferences for parents at the initial parent orientation meeting. These meetings are scheduled at the parent's convenience or for Tuesday "parent engagement" periods (Tuesday afternoons after school). All parents meet with the ENL teacher within the first month of admittance. Parents also meet with the ENL teacher during Curriculum Nights (September & May) and during Parent Teacher Conferences. We make arrangements either within our staff or within the community to provide translation for the parents if needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of ELL students are encouraged to attend the bi-annual Curriculum Nights and our monthly “First Fridays” in classrooms to learn more about curricula and ways to support their children at home. In addition the PTA hosts multiple weekend events where all parents and students are encouraged to participate. We have a high involvement of parent volunteers in our school. The parents contribute in many ways to our school. We have First Friday, where parents come in and read to the children in their children’s classrooms. We encourage our ELL parents to also read to their children in their native tongue in their children’s classrooms. Parents organize many school/community building events such as harvest fairs, International Day, Spring Fling Dance, and movie nights (where children watch a movie at the school, leaving the parents to have a free night). The parents also have book groups with children, organize a math super star program and are very active in the after school program. The PTA also has a newsletter that is printed in English and Spanish. All of our ELL parents are equally involved and invited to all events. The parent coordinator's role ensures that the ELL families are aware of school events by providing parents' preferred language communications as well as organizing translators at these events. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 1  2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Eve Litwack, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: John W. Kimball PS107 School DBN: 15K107 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Eve Litwack Title Principal Pascale Pradel Assistant Principal Pamela Rosenberg Parent Coordinator Margaret Galella ENL/Bilingual Teacher Leigh Smith Parent Sarah Hunt/SETSS Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A N/A Sarah Green Anita Skop Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 N/A N/A N/A 9/15/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 15K107 School Name: John W. Kimball Superintendent: A. Skop The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We gather data from the classroom teachers, the HLIS, and at individual parent conferences with the ENL teacher to determine the need for translation of materials or interpretation. Many of our parents are bi-lingual so there is often minimal need for translation of materials and interpreters for conferences. The PTA translates fliers into Spanish and translations of other school communications are made with the aid of our Spanish-speaking teachers. If other language translations are needed, the DOE provides basic communication letters on the website. We also run an ATS report to determine parent language preference for school communication. We work with parents on an individualized basis to tailor Emergency Contact Cards in their home language if needed. We also offer translation services for the DOE School Survey to parents as needed. 5  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language The vast majority of our parent ELL population are literate in both their home languages and in English. Although we have parents who speak Russian, Dutch, Hebrew, and Japanese, all prefer written school communications in English. All of our ELL parents are able to orally communicate in English as well. At the beginning of each year we offer translation services to ELL parents, however no requests have been made. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The following information is available for translation: PTA Family Handbook, classroom newsletters, school calendars, Parent Teacher conference announcements, principal letters to parents, after school program information, NYS testing dates. 6  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? ENL Parent Orientation meeting on 9/17/15 (am); Curriculum Night is 9/17/15 (pm); Fall Parent Teacher conferences are on 11/5/15; Spring Parent Teacher conferences are on 3/3/16; May Curriculum Conference 5/12/16. There are at least two additional conferences between the ENL teacher and the ELL parents, one in the fall and one in the mid-year (Jan-Feb). In addition, the ENL teacher will call home or meet with parents as needed. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The ENL teacher ensures that ELL parents receive all school notifications in their preferred languages. The ENL teacher works with the school administration, Parent Coordinator and building custodian to ensure that Welcome Posters for ELLs are displayed, the Parent Bill of Rights is distributed, and other materials are accessible. 7  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? ENL teacher, classroom teacher and administrators work together to ensure that parent needs are being met through formal and informal communication. 8 
