 21K128 School Name: P.S. 128 BENSONHURST Principal: JESSICA DRZEWUCKI   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Bensonhurst School 332100010128 Kindergarten through Fifth Grade 2075 84 th street Brooklyn, NY 11204 718-373-5900 School Number (DBN): 21K128 718-266-6245 Phone Number: Fax: Jessica Drzewucki jdrzewucki@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Jessica Drzewucki Tracy Albanese DyanaDuncan Jacqueline Tierno TBD N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 21 Superintendent’s Office Address: Ms. Isabel DiMola Superintendent: 1401 Emmons Ave, Room 101 Brooklyn, NY 11235 idimola@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-648-0209 Phone Number: 718-648-2165 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn South Mauricierede Govia FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 415 89 th St. Brooklyn, NY 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-439-5699 Phone Number: NA Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jessica Drzewucki Tracy Albanese DyanaDuncan N/A TBD N/A N/A N/A Samantha King LianneSchulman Jacqueline Tierno *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Yerika Alas Ross Brady Annabel Flores Jack Ng Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our Mission Statement: Section 4: CEP Overview At P.S.128, we recognize the unique talents and aspirations of each child, and we are committed to helping our children become productive, compassionate, innovative, knowledgeable, self-sufficient learners and citizens. We cultivate creativity and independency within each child through forging a safe and nurturing community that inspires   each scholar to strive for excellence. We encourage students to courageously take risks, to face challenges with integrity, and to always dream big. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S.128 The Bensonhurst School is a K-5th grade elementary school located in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn. In addition to top of the line academic programming and support, we offer children experiences in the arts, nutritional and physical education programs, after school enrichment, and a play-conducive school yard to ensure development of the whole child. Over the past two years, we have partnered with The Leader in Me, PlayWorks, Mighty Milers, Studio in a School, LeAp, Marquis Studios, The New York Historical Society, Theatre for a New Audience, and several other cultural arts organizations to bring enrichment programming to the school. We utilize multimedia and technological programs such as Ticket to Read and Mathletics to enhance children’s academic success and the home to school connection. We are a welcoming community where staff, parents, and students work together to ensure that our children are happy, successful citizens who are ready to meet the challenges of the 21st century. We share Books of the Month with our children and families, run a student government and a student leadership teams, and provide multiple whole family enrichment activities throughout the school year. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Half of the children we serve are English Language Learners, and a great many more are former English Language Learners. The vast majority of our children come from homes where English is not the primary spoken language, and many of our students were born in other countries. P.S.128 is unique in that we do not have one primary second language within the school, but many, including Russian, Chinese, Uzbek, Arabic, Urdu, Punjabi, Polish, and Georgian. The children need, therefore, a great deal of support in acquiring new language skills while keeping up with new learning, with acclimating to what is, in many instances, a new culture for them, and with making friends with children who may seem very different than themselves. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. With respect to the Framework for Great Schools, this year, we made gains in Rigorous Instruction and in Collaborative Teachers. Both of these goals were centered around student achievement, in ELA and in mathematics, and we met both goals. This year, we will grow these goals with the aim of continuing to propel our students forward in attaining mastery in literacy and math. We will continue to work on student achievement goals this year, raising our targets in order that our children, including ELLs and SWDs, move toward reaching mastery. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 21K128 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 467 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 14 14 20 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 26 27 20 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 87.0% % Attendance Rate 82.0% % Reduced Lunch 44.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 18.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 53.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.19 0% 15% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 28.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 78% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A YSH N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A NO N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 44 37 95.2% 5.1% 17.1% 1.1% 26.6% 0.4% 2 0% 8.7 42.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YSH N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We will focus on the NYC Performance Task in ELA for this goal in the 2018-2019 school year. We will continue to reach for our 2017-2018 goal with new strategies and heightened attention. Our teachers will continue to teach using the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project materials and supports, along with appropriate shared texts from ReadyGen and other programs. The focus will be on ensuring that children can read for information, form arguments, and write effectively. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 65% of students in grades K-5 will meet individual growth targets based on data from BOY and EOY NYC ELA Performance Task assessments. Individual growth targets will be set through determining 1/3 growth from BOY performance. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Continued work with Teachers College curricular materials, writing and reading. Teachers of grades K-5 September-June Principal ELL mandated services will support English Language Learners in the acquisition of writing skills. Teachers of ENL will use stand alone and push in ENL periods to support rigorous writing projects. Grades K-5 ELL students September - June 4 ENL Teachers A four day per week AIS Literacy teacher will support struggling and at-risk students. A two day per week AIS Literacy teacher will support struggling and at-risk students. Grades 3-5 students Grades K-2 students Administration and delegated teachers will provide PD on Monday afternoons to support Literacy content. Teachers of grades K-5 and Paraprofessionals September-June September-June September-June Assistant Principal Assistant Principal Teachers/Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Family workshops, including those on ELA testing support, Book of the Month, and Ticket to Read will assist families in helping children to reach their goals. The PC, AP, and data coordinator will lead these workshops. A yearlong family engagement calendar, aligned with important dates and deadlines on the DOE calendar, will be followed and attendance will be monitored. Additional outreach will seek to increase attendance. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staffing decisions will provide for intervention services, including the hiring of a three day per week F-status AIS provider and an additional full time ENL teacher. Scheduling decisions will provide for additional AIS and ENL services. Title III funds will be used to fund an after/before school targeted program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A 3  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 65% will meet interim benchmark. This will be determined as halfway to the 1/3 increase. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Interim Performance Task will indicate progress Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We did not meet our goal for the 2017-2018 school year, so we will continue to reach toward it. We strive to ensure the feeling of safety and support- physical, social-emotional, and academic- for all students. We seek to ensure that our children are respected as scholars and feel confident and empowered in their classrooms. We will focus on this through respecting and supporting our children toward success in mathematics. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 65% of students in grades K-5 will meet individual growth targets based on data from BOY and EOY NYC Math Performance Task assessments. Individual growth targets will be set through determining 1/3 growth from BOY performance. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The 4th and 5th grades will be completely departmentalized, with the 5th grade math teacher and the AIS/RTI mathematics teachers taking part in the Algebra for All initiative and training 5th and 4th grade students September-June Principal ENL teachers will present professional learning sessions to support classroom teachers in making mathematics accessible to ELLs. Teachers of grades K-5 and Paraprofessionals November-June Teachers and Administration Support from Generation Ready coach will be provided to teachers AIS mathematics will be provided to assist children who struggle. The AIS Teacher will also be taking part in the Algebra for All initiative and training Mathletics program will support student engagement and foster home/school connections toward achievement. Teachers of grades K-5 Targeted students in grades 3-5 Students in grades K-5 October-March October-June Principal AIS math teacher September-June Data Coordinator/Math AIS teacher 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Mathletics allows for a home/school connection, and a family workshop will allows families to learn more about how the program can enhance their children's achievement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administrative and professional development time will be dedicated to increasing faculty competency in increasing student support and engagement, particularly in mathematics. An AIS math teacher will provide student services. The Mathletics program will be renewed for the 2018-2019 school year. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 6  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 65% will meet interim benchmark. This will be determined as halfway to the 1/3 increase. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Interim Performance Task will indicate progress Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In 2017-2018 we focused on growing early grade literacy. We met our target, so this year we will raise it. Grade teams will work on specific fluency and comprehension goals in order to grow student reading levels, with special attention paid to early grade progress. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, grade teams will work on fluency and comprehension with children with a result that at least 50% of students in grades K-2 will be within two reading levels of grade level target according to Teachers College Reading and Writing Project levels. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers will participate in Inquiry Teamwork, focused on fluency and comprehension Early Childhood ENL teacher will attend PL series focused on early childhood and will turn key the information Continued work with Teachers College will grow teachers’ effectiveness in the teaching of reading, and use of Kindervention, Ticket to Read, and intervention programs will aide in the meeting of the goal. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Grade K-5 Teachers Grade K-2 Teachers Grade K-5 teachers October-June Inquiry Leads/Administration September-June September-June Principal Administration A targeted ELL before school program will boost student skills. Grade 1 ELL students November-May ELL teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Family workshops, including those focused on Book of the Month, Ticket to Read, and ELA testing will assist parents in becoming confident in helping children to grow in reading. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. A portion of professional development time and other professional work time will be used for collaborative inquiry. Title III funds will be used to fund a before school targeted program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 9  By February, 50% will meet interim benchmark (midyear expectations for grade level reading). This will be determined by midyear reading level assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student data from the midyear monitoring for progress report will be analyzed. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We strive to increase pedagogical competency and aptitude across all components of the Danielson Framework. We are very proud of our ELL performance on the state ELA exam and on other measures, and we will work to increase specifically their reading levels in order that they can meet grade level standards. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school administration will provide teachers with the professional development and support necessary that at least 50% of ELL students in grades 3-5 will have grown at least FOUR reading levels as measured by Teachers College Reading and Writing Project. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Continued work with Teachers College reading and writing will increase pedagogical skills in literacy instruction. Grade K-5 teachers Assistant Principal resources will be dedicated to support teachers in grades K-2. Target teachers Professional Learning Mondays will focus on ELL instruction, The Leader in Me, and areas of teacher struggle. Grade K-5 teachers Partnership with the Continuous Learning Fellowship will lead teachers of grade 3 and two Fellows through inquiry focused on increasing performance of ELLs. Grade 3 teachers, two Fellow teachers September introduction for new teachers. Ongoing Sept-June support for all teachers. September-June September-June September-June Administration Assistant Principal Principal Principal A four day per week F-Status experienced teacher will serve as a mentor to new teachers. Target teachers September-June Principal Social Studies professional development from Richard Bluttal will assist teachers in grades K-5 in growing their practice. Grades K-5 teachers September-January Principal The Reach program for ELLs and the Panorama program for everyone will support ELLs in reading strategies to meet content standards. Grades K-5 students October-June Principal Required end of year student shows and guidance therein will grow teachers toward better implementing project-based learning. Grade K-5 teachers A Friday Focus newsletter is written weekly by the principal, providing operational and pedagogical guidance, professional articles, and community building features. All Staff September-May, with culminating activities to take place April-May September-June Principal Principal A staff feedback box and sheets are provided in the main office at the end of each week through which teachers can express thoughts and concerns on an anonymous basis. All Staff September-June Principal 2  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through SLT, parent representatives will be kept informed regarding teacher progress. An open door policy with the principal and assistant principal will allow families to voice concerns and have questions answered. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The principal and assistant principal will dedicate several hours each week to observing, coaching, and meeting with teachers across performance levels, focusing on those who need additional assistance. Monday PD time will be used for teacher research, team work, and turnkey of academic materials. An F-Status mentor will provide support to new teachers. Outside PD sessions, targeting areas of need, will be sought and scheduled for teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 50% of ELLs in grades 3-5 will have grown two reading levels as measured by midyear Teachers College Reading and Writing Project reading assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student data from the midyear monitoring for progress report will be analyzed. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Parent attendance is historically poor at P.S.128, so our focus is on providing muiltiple opportunities for parents to learn, engage, and enjoy within the school building. Our aggregate NYC School Learning Survey results, as well as internal surveys taken after events, show positive parent perception of the school. This shows us that our parents feel supported, even if they do not physically show up at events. We seek to ensure that all parents remain informed and have plentiful opportunities to engage with the school so that they can budget their limited time appropriately, especially those whose children struggle. Last year, we targeted specific SWDs in 4th grade who had performed poorly on the state mathematics exam. We met our goal in raising their achievement, through extra attention and parent engagement. This year, we will strive toward this goal again with another target group of children. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, targeted students (SWDs in grades 4 and 5 with low performance on the 2018 State ELA Exam) will demonstrate 20% growth based on data from the NYC ELA Performance Task BOY to EOY assessment in conjunction with targeted parent outreach and instruction. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? A variety of academic, cultural, and family support workshops and information sessions will be offered. Parents September-June Parent Coordinator Family Literacy and Family Math Nights will welcome families into the school to learn more about the curriculum. Parents March-May RTI Math Teacher, Media Literacy Teacher, Assistant Principal The Leader in Me program will welcome families into the school to help children with leadership-based projects and celebrations Parents September-June School Lighthouse Team Multiple student performances and open classroom activities will be offered in order to welcome parents and let them see what their children are learning. Parents September-June Teachers and Administration Multiple methods of outreach, including email blasts, school website, school app, translated written communication, and phone calls will be used to make parents aware and feel welcomed. Breakfast with the Principal will take place once per month, inviting parents in to share concerns, questions, and ideas. Targeted gatherings for parents of targeted SWDs will take place at least twice per year in order to build community and offer support. Parents September-June All Staff Parents Parents September-June Principal and Parent Coordinator November and April Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Leader in Me, Cornell Cooking, CookShop, LeAp, CASA. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds will be leveraged to bring family engagement activities and performances to the school. Title 1 parent involvement money will provide for math and literacy family nights or other events as determined by the parent body. The Parent Coordinator will work on minimum twice monthly parent workshops/information sessions and the 5  advertising of these events. Funds will provide for a school app, duplication materials, and maintenance of the school website. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, targeted students will demonstrate 20% growth on the midyear NYC ELA Performance Task. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Interim Performance Task data will indicate progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Identification of students is based on analysis of classroom assessment data and teacher recommendations. Mathematics Identification of students is based on analysis of classroom assessment data and teacher recommendations. Identification Science of students is based on analysis of classroom assessment data and teacher recommendations. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) *Six week cycles *Small group *Research based *One to one When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Service is provided during the school day *Students grouped and program used (Fundations, Intervention by Design, Wilson, etc.) determined by student need *Six week cycles *Focused on skill acquisition *Small group (no more than ten) Service is provided during the school day *One to one Infused into ELAand MathAIS *Small group *One to one Service is provided during the school day Social Studies Identification Infused into ELA AIS *Small group of students is based on analysis of classroom assessment data and *One to one Service is provided during the school day 7 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) teacher recommendations. Identification of students is based on teacher and/or parent recommendation, followed by observation by the provider. *Students are guided to understand their current needs *Social/emotional support provided through weekly meetings *At-risk health services provided on a case-by-case basis *Small group *One to one Service is provided during the school day 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) As of June 2018, one child is living in temporary housing (this child graduated from 5th grade). 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide school materials (including a backpack, books, clothing, and school supplies) to STH. We also work with ACS, foster agencies, and the families to ensure that their transportation and other needs are being met. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The principal works with an internal hiring team of four teachers as well as with the borough support center’s Human Resource specialist to recruit highly qualified candidates. Once hired, our collaborative team of administrators and teachers works closely to transition new staff to our school. Required mentoring, as well as additional coaching services, are provided in-house. P.S. 128 strives to remain a highly collaborative and caring environment. The principal, the assistant principal, the data specialist, lead teachers, and outside specialists (as needed) will provide on-going high quality professional development aligned with Common Core State Standards. Ongoing training will be provided to all teachers. Funding permitted, professional books will be purchased and made available as resource materials. Teachers will be empowered to write their own individual professional growth goals and actively participate in their own learning through the use of WeTeach NYC, and through collaboration within the school building. Teacher teams will be supported and encouraged as they plan, create curriculum, and study strategies of assessment through inquiry. Teachers will be supported to lead professional development sessions in their areas of expertise and in areas in which they wish to grow. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Funds will be used to provide on-site professional development as well as substitutes for teachers to attend off-site professional development. ● Professional development will be given on the eight evaluated Danielson components of effective teaching, as well as on particular areas of P.S.128 focus such as writing, social studies pedagogy, strategies to use with ELLs, and co-teaching. ● Per diem substitute money will be used for grade-specific and vertical planning days to work on curriculum development. ● A District 21 Social Studies pilot will support 4th grade teachers in growing content area specialty. 1  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.).  Aligned curriculum with early grades supports, including the Kindervention program  Review of all preschool records for incoming kindergartners    The Leader in Me program, with family outreach, to help students adjust socially and emotionally to the Support for Turning 5 students Kindergarten family orientation each June school community  Playworks positive play program to teach inclusion, coping with winning/losing, and student leadership 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers participate in decisions around the use and selection of multiple assessment measures through serving on the MoSL committee, serving on the Monday PD team, participating in teacher-led inquiry teams, and leading peer workshops to turnkey curricular and assessment information gathered from outside PD sessions and created internally. Grade team leaders work together to make decisions around assessment calendars and professional development needs, and serve as liaison learners in partnership with our external support systems. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the 2  consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 353,431 0 25,934 0 5,085,659 X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5a/b/c/d/e Section 5a/c/d Section 5b/c/d/e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 3  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. P.S 128 School Parental Involvement Policy Parent and Family Engagement Policy 2018-2019 I. General Expectations PS 128 agrees to implement the following statutory requirements: 1. The school will plan programs, activities, and procedures for the involvement of parents, consistent with section 1118 of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). These programs, activities, and procedures will be planned and carried out with meaningful consultation with parents of all children as we are a SWP Title I school. 2. The school will ensure that the required school-level Parental Involvement Policy meets the requirements of section 1118(b) of the ESSA, and includes, as a component, a School-Parent Compact consistent with section 1118(d) of the ESSA. 3. The school will incorporate this Parental Involvement Policy into its School Improvement Plan. 4. In carrying out the Title I Part A parental involvement requirements, to the extent feasible, the school will provide full opportunities for the participation of parents with limited English proficiency, parents with disabilities, and parents of migratory children. Parents will be provided with information and school reports required under section 1111 of the ESSA in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats, upon request, in a language parents understand. 5. The parents of children served in SWP Title I Part A programs, will be involved in decision-making about how the 1% of Title I Part A funds, reserved for parental involvement, is spent. 5  6. The school will use the following definition of parental involvement, and will carry out programs, activities, and procedures in accordance with this definition: Parental involvement means the participation of parents in regular, two-way, and meaningful communication involving student academic learning and other school activities, including that: ● Parents play an integral role in assisting their child’s learning. ● Parents are encouraged to be actively involved in their child’s education at school. ● Parents are full partners in their child’s education. ● Parents are included in decision-making and on advisory committees and the carrying out of other activities, such as those described in section 1118 of the ESSA. ● At PS 128 the Title I annual parent meeting will be held in October at the first PTA meeting 7. The school will inform parents and parental organizations of the purpose and existence of the Parental Information and Resource Center in the State. IV. Adoption ● This School Parental Involvement Policy has been developed jointly with, and agreed on with, parents of children participating in SWP/Title I conceptually consolidated program, as evidenced by PS 128 School Leadership Team bylaws. This policy was adopted by the P.S.128 SLT on ____________________and will be in effect for the period of one year. The school will make this policy available to all parents of participating SWP/Title I children on or before November 2017. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students II. Description of How School Will Implement Required Parental Involvement Policy Components. 1. PS 128 will take the following actions to involve parents in the joint development of its school parental involvement plan under section 1112 of the ESSA: ● An annual introductory meeting for all parents to meet the parent coordinator, family assistants, and support personnel. ● Contact information will be provided so that all parents can avail themselves at anytime by cell phone of the services of the parent coordinator. ● Translated notices, together with an outreach program, will engage parents in their children’s education. ● A voluntary email distribution list will be coordinated so that the principal and parent coordinator can send out email communiqués, in addition to the paper communiqués. 2. PS 128 will take the following actions to involve parents in the process of school review and improvement under section 1116 of the ESSA: 6  ● Parents will be involved in planning, reviewing and improving the SWP and parents involvement program. ● Parents will be provided with timely information on programs, workshops, events and meetings. ● PS 128 will provide the necessary coordination, technical assistance, and other support for planning and implementing effective parental involvement activities to improve student academic achievement and school performance. ● PS 128 will hold monthly workshops, monthly PTA meetings, and School Leadership Team meetings to provide an opportunity for parents to become informed about Academic Standards, standardized tests and assessments, and to be involved in the planning, review, and improvement of SWP programs. 3. PS 128 will coordinate and integrate Title I parental involvement strategies by consultation with the SWP Title I PTA chairperson. 4. PS 128 will use the 1%Title I Schoolwide Program funds to include workshops for parents on curriculum, Book of the Month, homework help, discipline/stress management, Parent ARIS link, nutrition, etc. and for the purchase of appropriate supplies or events as determined by the parent body. 6. PS 128 will build the school’s and parents’ capacity to ensure effective involvement of parents and to support a partnership with the parents and the community to improve student academic achievement. A. The school will provide assistance to parents to help them understand topics such as the following: ● The State’s academic content standards ● The State’s student academic achievement standards ● The State’s and local academic assessments including alternate assessments, the requirements of Part A, how to monitor their child’s progress. ● How to work with educators, i.e., workshops, conferences, classes. The school will provide materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their children’s academic achievement. The school will also provide technology training to foster parent involvement by teaching them how to access and to look at the DOE website for statistics such as the Learning Environment Survey, School Quality Snapshot, and Quality Review Report. Parents will also be trained in how to access STARS Classroom. B. The School Leadership Team will encourage teachers, pupil services personnel and other staff, in how to reach out to, communicate with, and work with parents as equal partners. C. The school will take the following actions to ensure that information related to the school and parent programs, meetings, and other activities, is sent to the parents of participating children in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon request and in a language the parents can understand (i.e. Spanish, Arabic, Urdu, Chinese and Russian). Parental Involvement and School Quality A coordinating effort will be made by PS 128 and the parents, to evaluate the content and effectiveness of this Parent Involvement Policy in improving school quality. The evaluation will include identifying barriers to greater participation by parents in parental involvement activities. The school will use the findings of the evaluation about its Parent Involvement Policy and activities to design strategies for more effective parental involvement, and to revise, if necessary, its Parent Involvement Policy. The success of the Parent Involvement Policy will be continually assessed 7  through surveys, agendas, attendance at meetings and school functions, together with parent teacher conferences and other school events. III. Discretionary School Parental Involvement Policy Components Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The School Parental Involvement Policy may include other discretionary activities that the school, in consultation with its parents, chooses to undertake to build parents’ capacity for involvement in the school and school system to support their children’s academic achievement, such as the following discretionary activities listed under section 1118(e) of the ESSA: ● Involving parents in the development of training for teachers, principals, and other educators to improve the effectiveness of that training ● Providing necessary literacy training for parents from Title I Part A funds, if the school district has exhausted all other reasonably available sources of funding for that training. ● Paying reasonable and necessary expenses associated with parental involvement activities, including transportation and child care costs, to enable parents to participate in school-related meetings and training sessions ● Training parents to enhance the involvement of other parents ● Maximizing parental involvement and participation in their children’s education by arranging school meetings at a variety of times and conducting in-home conferences ● Adopting and implementing model approaches to improving parental involvement ● Developing appropriate roles for community-based organizations and businesses ● Providing other reasonable support for parental involvement activities under section 1118 as parents may request P.S. 128 School-Parent Compact School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-2019 School Responsibilities P.S. 128 will ensure: Parents will be involved in the joint development of any Schoolwide Program plan in an organized, on-going, and timely way. Increased parent involvement at workshops and meetings will help support students’ learning at home, and provide opportunities for parents to benefit as participants in decision-making activities. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high-quality curriculum and instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment that enables the participating children to meet the State’s student academic achievement standards as follows: 8  · By creating a supportive environment for teachers using mentors, buddy teachers, and other senior staff members. · By offering workshops and high quality professional development for teachers to enhance and develop their teaching capabilities, aligned to the Common Core State Standards I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Hold parent-teacher conferences to discuss curriculum and student achievement by: · Conferences will be held four times a year: September, November, March, and May · Providing parents reports on their children’s progress three times a year. . Providing interim progress reports . Providing parents with parent learning outcome reports · Providing, when appropriate, I.E.P. progress goals at the Annual Review Meeting. P.S. 128 will create an environment of open communication between parents and school staff with frequent reports on an on-going as-needed basis to inform them of the curriculum and their children’s progress. I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff The staff will be available, as their schedule permits, for consultation with parents during preparation periods, before and after school, and for communication with parents by telephone. Parents will have opportunities to volunteer and to observe classroom activities during Grade Teas, Open School Days, Dance Festival, Publishing Parties, and during other school events. P.S. 128 will have monthly School Leadership Team Meetings, P.T.A Meetings, and monthly workshops to provide a hands-on opportunity for parents to become involved in the planning, review and improvement of SWP Programs and becoming informed about standardized tests and assessments in an organized, ongoing, and timely way. 9  I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide parents of participating children information in a timely manner about Title I Part A programs that include a description and explanation of the school’s curriculum, the forms of academic assessment used to measure student progress, and the proficiency levels students are expected to meet. At the request of parents, provide opportunities for regular meetings for parents to formulate suggestions, and to participate, as appropriate, in decisions about the education of their children. The school will respond to any such suggestions as soon as practicably possible. Provide to each parent an individual student report about the performance of their child on the State assessments in ELA, math, science, and social studies. Provide each parent timely notice when their child has been assigned or has been taught for four (4) or more consecutive weeks by a teacher who is not highly qualified within the meaning of the term in section 200.56 of the Title I. Provide to parents a copy of the Parent Compact in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon request and in a language the parents can understand (i.e. Spanish, Arabic, Urdu, Chinese and Russian) Parent Responsibilities II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities We, as parents, will support our children’s learning in the following ways: ● Making sure that homework is completed. ● Monitoring the amount of television our children watch. ● Monitoring attendance and lateness. ● Volunteering within the school community. ● Participating, as appropriate, in decisions relating to my children’s education. ● Attend extra-curricular activities, such as, parent workshops and student performances. ● Taking part in the Learning Environment Survey. ● Attend parent conferences (i.e., PTC, PHO, IEP, etc.). 0  ● Staying informed about my child’s education and communicating with the school by promptly reading all notices from the school or the school district either received by my child or by mail and responding, as needed. ● Serving, to the extent possible, on policy advisory groups. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities We, as students, will share the responsibility to improve our academic achievement and achieve the State’s high standards. We will: ● Do homework every day and ask for help when needed. ● Read at least 30 minutes every day when not in school. ● Bring home all notices and information received from school every day. ● Work hard to meet and exceed the standards and always be kind to one another. 1  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 2 1 1 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: Session 1: P.S. 128 will be focusing on all of our 1st Grade ELLs. The program will focus on language acquisition. Schedule and Duration: The program will meet every morning for one hour. (Monday-Friday 7:00am - 8:00am) October 16th- December 22nd October 16th- 31st: 12 sessions November 1st- 30th: 19 sessions December 1st- 22nd: 16 sessions Language of Instruction: English # and types of certified teachers: Two licensed and certified educators will provide instruction during the after school program. The program will be cooperative teaching where a certified ENL teacher and a certified common branch/content specialty teacher will provide English instruction together. An administrator will also be in the school building during the program to oversee the logistics and to ensure the program runs smoothly and safely. Types of Materials: Imagine Learning, word games, interactive maps, and bilingual dictionaries These among other research based materials will be used for instruction. Translated invitations for the program will be sent home and signed by the parent. Copies of these invitations will be kept in the main office for review. Program records and attendance will be maintained by the instructor and kept in the main office. Session 2: P.S. 128 will be focusing on all of our 2nd Grade ELLs. The program will focus on language acquisition. 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Schedule and Duration: The program will meet Saturday mornings in the Spring of 2018. Information and details TBA. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: Content area instruction is stressed in the ENL classroom to help that all students meet the Common Core State Standards. The ENL teachers collaborate with classroom teachers to support ELLs on the daily basis. Teachers to Receive Training: All teachers receive professional development on how to improve ELL instruction. Teachers will be provided with professional books during Monday Professional Development hours to help support ELLs in the classroom, and build their professional library. Titles of professional book to be ordered is as follows: "English-Only Teachers in Mixed Language Classrooms - A Survival Guide." Our ENL team consisting of: Ms. Schulman, Mrs. Vuono and Ms. Kornacka provide all ENL professional development to staff. Agendas and sign-ins from all professional development is held in the school's main office, i.e. the ENL drawer. Certified ENL teachers are sent to network professional development through out the year to keep up with ENL strategies and will be using various professional books to help improve instruction. ENL teacher Professional Development for 2016-2017 is ongoing: New teachers receive 7.5-10 hours of ENL training through lunch during the school year. Schedule and Duration & Topics To Be Covered: (TENTATIVE) September- Every Teacher is a Teacher of ELLs. November- Supporting Newcomers and ENL data December- Strategies for ELLs January- Incorporating Technology in ENL March- Getting Ready for NYSESLAT April- Poetry for ELLs May/June- ENL Summer Family Activities Name of Provider: The ENL teachers, Anya Kornacka and Sara Vuono lead the professional development. 4  Part C: Professional Development Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: The Parent Coordinator, Mrs. Montemurro works with the ENL teachers to schedule ENL Parent Workshops. We will be hosting parent workshops throughout the year to support learning at home and build relationships on our school community. Most parent workshops will be held on Tuesday afternoons from 2:30-3:00. We plan to provide parents the opportunity to attend free adult English classes as we partner with an outside agency. Agendas and sign-ins from all parent engagement activities are held in the school's main office, i.e. the ENL drawer. Schedule & Duration and Topics to be Covered: (TENTATIVE) November- Workshop (Auditorium)): Strategies for Helping at Home February- Workshop (Auditorium): "ENL in Action"- Powerpoint presentation March- Parent International Breakfast (Cafeteria) April- Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT; Guest Speaker Name of Provider: The Parent Coordinator, Mrs. Montemurro and and ENL teachers, Anya Kornacka and SaraVuono will host all ENL Parent Workshops and other activities. How Parents Will Be Notified of These Activities: Parents are notified by translated fliers that are sent home with students. There is also a parent bulletin board in the main lobby which posts information for all parents. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem 5  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 21 School Name The Bensonhurst School Borough Brooklyn School Number 128 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jessica Drzewucki Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Mrs. Vuono, Ms. Kornacka, Ms. Teacher/Subject Area Mrs. Tierno Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Albanese Related-Service Provider Ms. Shine Superintendent Isabel DiMola Assistant Principal Jayme Perlman Coach N/A School Counselor Ms. Arbiana Asani Parent Dyana Duncan Parent Coordinator Roseanne Montemurro Field Support Center Staff Member Ronny Rodriguez Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 465 7 Total number of ELLs 206 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 44.30%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Teacher's College is used to assess the early literacy skills of all students including our ELL students. Monitoring Progress, which is based on Fountas and Pinnell levels are collected at least 3 times a year. This data is analyzed. Students who are at risk get extra support. The Teacher's College results and writing samples are collected and analyzed by the RTI team to target deficiencies in the general and ELL population and plan for next steps using research based program. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Monitoring for progress is the structure in place to support the Teacher's College Reading and Writing assessments. Our RTI team meets monthly to discuss the general student and ELL student progress based in "Monitoring for Progress", student work, and teacher observations. If a student is not meeting standards they are put into an RTI group, where teachers use a research based program that would meet the needs of the student. 8  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In order to evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs we review Teacher's College results and use informal teacher observations and conferences during lessons. We also analyze student progress by looking at the NYSESLAT modalities. Areas of needs for students are as follows: reading comprehension, grammar and phonics. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? P.S. 128's Response to Intervention Team begins gathering data. The RTI team monitors progress using the DRA assessment to evaluate whether the student is responding to the interventions, and whether interventions are matched to students' specific needs. Furthermore, NYSESLAT scores are used to see if ELLs are making adequate progress. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] ELLs that are refereed to the RTI team for Tier 2 intervention are assessed and monitored over a period of 6 weeks using a research based program and assessments. RTI Tier 2 services are provided for students in a small group setting based on student need. If ELLs do not show improvement during that 6 week time period a different program will be implemented. If there is not sufficient improvement students are then refereed to the RTI team for Tier 3 intervention. Tier 3 intervention is a 1:1 setting. All services are provided by an AIS teacher. A pre-assessment is administered to all RTI students to determine student individual and specific need. Progress is monitored closely and students are discussed at RTI team meetings to best support their progress. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Assessment Outcomes: 2016-2017 NYSITELL Entering: 19 Emerging: 4 Transitioning: 4 Expanding: 8 Entering: 10 Entering: 11 Emerging: 1 Entering: 2 Entering: 12 Expanding: 1 2016-2017 NYSESLAT Entering: 3 Emerging: 4 Transitioning: 3 Expanding: 14 9  Commanding: 9 Entering: 3 Emerging: 12 Transitioning: 23 Expanding: 14 Commanding: 2 Entering: 5 Emerging: 4 Transitioning: 13 Expanding: 9 Commanding: 5 Entering: 0 Emerging: 4 Transitioning: 1 Expanding: 10 Commanding: 3 Entering: 6 Emerging: 9 Transitioning: 2 Expanding: 18 Commanding: 9 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? ENL Teacher provide mandated instruction of integrated and/or stand alone ENL services according to student NYSESLAT scores. NYSESLAT scores are shared with teachers and parents. ELLs can be grouped according to need in both stand-alone and integrated ENL programs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. All Entering, Emerging students are provided with stand alone and integrated ENL services as per city and state regulations. The Transitioning students receive stand-alone or integrated services depending on their individual needs. Expanding and commanding students receive integrated ENL services. The stand-alone model is implemented in an ENL classroom. The integrated model is implemented as co-teaching in the common branch classroom. Students are grouped differently. Entering and emerging ELLs are grouped together during the stand-alone model. ELLs can be grouped together based on proficiency level or integrated with non-ELLs during the integrated model. 0  b. TBE program. If applicable. P.S. 128 does not currently have a TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. P.S. 128 does not currently have a DL program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We closely analyze the RLAT report from ATS to determine student's proficiencies and program them according to the CR Part 154 requirements for ELLs. Entering students receive 180 standalone ESL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL instruction.Emerging students will receive 180 standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated.Transitioning students will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL and another 90 minutes of either standalone OR integrated ENL. Expanding students will receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL.Commanding students will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL per week for two consecutive years. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students are not evaluated in their native language throughout the year. However, all students are provided with native language support bilingual dictionaries, translating technology, as well as the NYC translation services. Furthermore, students take the NYS assessments (Math and Science) in their native language when available. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Services and programs such as RTI and/or newcomer groups are made available for SIFE students if necessary. Newcomer ELLs are given 360 minutes of ELL service by a certified ENL teacher. Newcomers are also paired up with a class buddy that speaks their native language. Students are given visual aides, bilingual dictionaries, picture dictionaries, vocabulary picture card, and simplified language during instruction. Newcomers are encouraged to speak their native language when sharing information, that is then translated by the teacher or translation technology. ELLs with four to six years of service receive scaffolded instruction aligned to the Common Core state standards, to help students meet grade level curriculum. Content leveled books to teach skills, strategies and content area information. In order to ensure student growth, our plan for these students is to build on academic language using rigorous content based lessons and projects. Lessons are delivered to address the different modalities of learning. Like all ELLs, these students are given extended time on their state assessments. The classroom teacher differentiates to meet the needs of the student.There are no long term ELLS at this time. If there were long term ELL students our plan would be to further analyze academic weaknesses and provide differentiated instruction and use research based programs.Former ELLS are given mandated continued support 90 minutes a week. These former ELLs are also provided with testing accommodations where they receive time and a half to complete the exams for the first two years of becoming proficient. Instruction and content area tasks are differentiated in all classes. Commanding students are given the opportunity to use these tasks during the mandated integrated ENL time. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 1  The ENL teachers discuss grade level curriculum with common branch teachers in order to create differentiated tasks for ELL-SWDs in order to foster accelerated English language development.Our ENL teachers currently use Rigby "On Our Way to English" for grades K-3 and National Geographic "Ladders" for grades 4-5 and "Reach" programs for grade s K-2. These materials help differentiate instruction by using various lexile levels, visual aides, big books and leveled readers.Use of extensive technology and a variety of modalities help ELL-SWDs develop their receptive and productive skills. Smartboards, Eno boards, ipads, laptops, and document cameras are available for students. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students are grouped heterogeneously by grade and proficiency. All students receive differentiated instruction based on student need. Teachers use the Common Core Curriculum in science, social studies, and math. The students have access to technology and are taught literacy that is differentiated and aligned to the Common Core State Standards for their grade. Concrete manipulative, pictures, video clips, and role playing provide support in all academic areas.Our ENL team works closely with other service providers in order to support ELL-SWDs meet their IEP goals. ELL-SWDs receive mandated ENL services based on NYSESLAT proficiency as well as IEP services at different times through the school day. Services are programmed to not interfere with each other and support IEP goals as well as language acquisition. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. RTI Literacy and Math- The interventions are based on DRA levels, writing levels, and the modality analysis of the current NYSESLAT, in order to support the specific area in need. Students are further differentiated by flexible grouping.In most cases the ELL group that our we target are students that have received ENL services for 2 or more years, however the RTI team reviews data on all students and will support newcomer ELLs when needed. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? ELLs upper and lower grade buddies will be used this year to promote language development and social development among the school. Integrate grammar and phonics into the content area using the "Reach" program. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We do not have any programs at this time that will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are invited to attend P.S. 128 all activities such as, possible after school programs, RTI, and music, dance and theatre clubs. The Title III Morning program is offered to all 1st grade ELLs. It meets five days a week from 7am to 8am. It is a program that has students use technology, materials and games to support language acquisition. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials, including technology that are used at P.S. 128 are: 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support during ENL instruction is delivered using content area glossaries and nativie language dictionaries. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Instruction and support of all ELLs is given on student grade level and will be differentiated according to student need. Different developmentally appropriate materials are used to ensure high engagement, interest, and language acquisition.All ELL-SWDs are supported with materials and tasks that are cognitively demanding and tailored to their individual needs. 2  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not have co-location. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the beginning of the school year, newly enrolled students and their parents are encouraged to visit our school website. They have the opportunity to meet with the parent coordinator to answer any questions about the school prior to attending.Parents are invited to attend a Welcome Night where they can meet teachers and discuss any concerns they may have.Newly admitted students had the opportunity to meet the ENL teacher and visit their ENL classroom prior to beginning the school year.First, second, third and fifth graders receive instruction in Newcomer classes, taught one period weekly. Newly admitted first graders are invited and attend a before school English Language program..The ENL teachers: Ms. Kornacka, Ms. Schulman, Ms. McCormick and Mrs. Vuono, as well as Ms. Montemurro, our parent coordinator are involved in all activities. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? There are currently no language electives offered to ELLs at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? P.S. 128 does not currently have a DL program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? In order to support our General Education teachers and Special Education teachers, ENL teachers will hold a professional development for all staff members. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 3  Every Tuesday afternoon from 2:20-3:00pm parents are encouraged to visit with his or her child's ENL teacher. We will hold parent workshops throughout the year at this time. This time is set aside so that parents of ELLs are able to discuss goals of the program, language development, language proficiency assessment results and development needs in all content areas.Teachers use electronic translators and the DOE translation line for any interpretation and translation needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parent involvement happens throughout the school year. ELL parents are invited to orientation at the beginning of the year. The ENL teachers, with the help of Ms. Montemurro (Parent Coordinator) host workshops that introduce parents to materials and programs that students participate in and use, such as - Book of the Month, which teaches parents our school's approach to teaching literacy with such a high ELL population, How to Help Your Child with Homework, in which parents receive tools, resources and websites which enable parents to help their children with their homework. Parents are also invited to attend free adult ENL classes in our building, which are held twice a week, 3 hours each session, all year long. Parents of ELLs are invited to several after school programs for adults, such as Cookshop- a program that teaches parents about health, nutrition and cooking, and NYC Schools Account- a tool parents have where they can create an account assigned to their child for the duration they are enrolled in the NYC Public School system, which contains students' attendance, state exam dates/scores, comments from teachers, classroom assessments, behavioral reports, etc.. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jessica Drzewucki, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Bensonhurst School School DBN: 21K128 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Mrs. Drzewucki Title Principal Mrs. Perlman Assistant Principal Mrs. Montemurro Parent Coordinator Mrs. Vuono ENL/Bilingual Teacher Mrs. Dyana Duncan Parent Mrs. Tierno Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Guarneri Teacher/Subject Area None None Ms. Arbiana Ms. DiMola Nelly Cortes None None None Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 1020/17 10/20/17 10/2017 10/2017 10/20/2017 10/20/2017 10/20/2017 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 21K128 School Name: The Bensonhurst School Superintendent: Isabel DiMola The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No RoseAnne Montemurro Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school.  We use the HLIS to assess need.  We input the home language and use information found on ATS, for example the BIOS screen.  We use ATS reports such as RAPL to assess preferred spoken and written language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English 172 37.4% 170 37% 7  Russian 104 Chinese inc. MN and CT 68 49 30 19 7 6 2 1 1 1 1 1 Spanish Arabic Uzbek Albanian Urdu Ukrainian Italian Pilipino Punjabi Turkish Tajik 22.6% 14.8% 10.6% 6.5% 4.1% 1.5% 1.3% .4% .2% .2% .2% .2% .2% 106 69 48 30 17 7 7 2 1 1 1 1 1 23% 14.9% 10.4% 6.5% 3.7% 1.5% 1.5% .4% .2% .2% .2% .2% .2% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent Teacher Conference Announcements November and March Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We use DOE intranet templates for covered languages. 8  Student Report Cards November, March and June After School Program Information October Parent Workshop Letters Throughout the year We used school based personnel and/or translation vendors for non covered languages when needed. We use DOE intranet templates for covered languages. We use DOE T&I unit translation for covered languages and school based personnel for translation of non covered languages. We use DOE T&I unit translation for covered languages and school based personnel for translation of non covered languages. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences November and March Open School Night September Curriculum Night May Initial ELL Parent Orientation September and October interpretation service(s)? We will use over-the-phone interpretation services and bilingual school personnel. We will use bilingual school staff and DOE translation services. We will use bilingual school staff and DOE translation services. We will use bilingual school staff and DOE translation services. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use DOE translation services and student emergency blue cards to reach limited-English-proficient families. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 9   The LAC will turn key information to school personnel during staff development time during the year.  The LAC and ENL team will be trained on policies and procedures.  The ENL team will provide Professional Development for school staff to ensure all personnel are aware of the procedures. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..)  We will download, print, and copy all provided translations of notices from central offices.  We will use DOE translation and interpretation services for all parent correspondence.  We will ensure that translation, in person or over the phone, is provided for parents during meetings.  We will ensure that parents receive the Bill of Parent Rights and responsibilities regarding translation and interpretation.  We will ensure that our entrance way includes the required translated "welcome" and information about translation services.  We will ensure that we have enough required documents in multiple languages to provide additional copies to our families of new admits. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services?  All parents, including limited-English-Proficient are given a parent survey to complete in order for our school to gather feedback from parents. 0 
