 22K139 School Name: P.S. 139 ALEXINE A. FENTY Principal: MARY MCDONALD   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: PS 139 AlexineA. Fenty 332200010139 BEDS Code: School Number (DBN): 22K139 Grades Served: Pre-K-5 330 Rugby Road Brooklyn, New York 11226 School Address: Phone Number: 718-282-5254 Fax: 718-940-1205 Email Address: Mmcdona10@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Mary McDonald Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Mary McDonald Vacancy Kelly Lisman Irene Varon Jessica Dowshen N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 22 Superintendent: Julia Bove Superintendent’s Office Address: 415 89th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11209 Superintendent’s Email Address: JBove@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-968-6123 Fax: 718-391-6191 Field Support Center (FSC) MauricieriDegovia FSC: Brooklyn South Executive Director: Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11209   Executive Director’s Email Address: mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov 718-968-6248 Phone Number: : 718-759-4862 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Mary McDonald Kelly Lisman Irene Varon Jessica Dowshen N/A N/A N/A Vacancy Carolyn Greenwood Diane Dougherty Keri Gioia *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/UFT   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Val Kostinenko Vacancy Gia Accardi Anne Montero Haley Rosario-Meade Jessica Dowshen ShaylaMomo Arcelia Leal Member/Parent Member/UFT Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS 139 is dedicated to creating a nurturing community: a community where all children strive for high standards and develop a love for learning and respect for themselves and others.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 139 is located in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn. This is a neighborhood of both single-family homes and large, densely populated apartment houses surrounded by commercial avenues. The neighborhood is economically and culturally diverse. Our families speak approximately 30 languages at home. Our diverse student body represents countries such as: Pakistan, the former Soviet Union, Mexico, the Dominican Republic, Haiti, as well other countries in the Caribbean, South and Central America, Asia, Europe and Africa. The PS 139 community believes that students develop through diverse activities. We believe that teaching students to develop and thrive via their artistic/competitive talents/social-emotional skills is an essential part of the development of the whole child as much as academics. The progress and continued expansion of our social-emotional, arts, chess and sports programs has been a deliberate attempt to reach all students, with the goal of developing the whole child and exercising the multiple intelligences of all children.  Morning meeting is held each day, throughout the school.  With three full-time guidance counselors, we have guidance services for each of the grade bands: Pre K,K & 1, 2 & 3, 4 & 5. Each guidance counselor sees at-risk and mandated students, as well as assisting students who are in crisis.  A Girls Leadership Group was started to address the specific social-emotional needs of female students in the upper grades. With its success, a boys group was added.  All students receive chess instruction from a chess expert. Our chess team has taken local, state and national honors.  We have two music teachers. The lower grades have Music and the Brain, which has a math component. The upper grades learn music notation/theory, as well as the recorder. The after-school programs include: chorus, band, orchestra, violin, and guitar.  PreK classes have Studio-in-a-School residencies.  There are now two art teachers on our specialist list, covering all students in grades K-5.  The school partners with Teachers College, TC Reading Rescue, Metamorphosis, Responsive Classroom, the Church Avenue Merchants and Block Association (CAMBA), Music and the Brain, Marquis Studio, the Flatbush Food Coop, neighborhood elected officials, the Flatbush Development Corporation, the Brooklyn Public library, and Brooklyn College among others, in order to provide services and programs for our students. We have an active parent community; the school and Parents Association provide multiple points of entry for parents to reach each parent at his/her comfort level. Activities such as the Harvest Feast, Arts Night, and grade level concerts provide a social context for parents to become familiar with the school and the staff. The New Parent Breakfast, held during the second week of school each year, introduces our parents to key members of the staff, such as the grade administrators, guidance counselors and school psychologist so key staff become familiar to parents. Family Fun Day is held monthly, parents experience the day-to-day school environment: academics, routines, etc. Many family members experience activities with our curriculum specialists: music, art, science and physical education teachers encourage parents/guardians to actively participate in their classes. Workshops are planned to enhance parent knowledge about content areas, parenting strategies, child development, and social-emotional learning. Parents Association committees have lead the way in areas such as Participatory Budgeting and creating a school garden that includes after school activities for families and weekend work days. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Approximately 194 of our students are English language learners (ELLs), some coming with developed literacy skills in their native language, others needing to develop literacy skills. Approximately 167of our students are students with disabilities. Their needs range from requiring speech and/or counseling services only, to having serious emotional or academic needs. The type of need is also varied, including some students who are on the autism spectrum. Students 0  who are performing above grade level require instruction to enhance their skills and push their academic progress. 72.1% of our population is Title 1 eligible. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We made progress in the area of Rigorous Instruction and feel that we need to continually improve in this area: *Teachers work to differentiate instruction in all subject areas. Assessments are aligned to Learning Standards and data from assessments is used to create and execute differentiated small group instruction. This is a multi-year focus. *Teachers worked together in grade and vertical teams to improve to use of multiple sources of data to provide targeted instruction and will continue to do so. This includes using data to create small group lessons. Teachers and administration will engage in professional development sessions with Teachers College and Metamorphosis. School-wide, teachers participated in and facilitated cycles of learning to enhance teacher practice - building capacity in this area will continue to be an area of focus for the 2018-2019 school year. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 22K139 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 992 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 53 54 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 7 7 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 80.0% % Attendance Rate 76.5% % Reduced Lunch 17.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.0% 40.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 10.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 15.1 5% 30% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 33.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 73% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO YES NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 74 72 93.6% 3.4% 17.5% 25.5% 19.6% 3.4% 6 6% 6.1 33.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A NO NO YES YES N/A NO NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Professional Learning for administration in our district around the power of a well written learning objective was rolled out this year. Education researcher John Hattie highlights the power of the learning objective notably he writes: Simply tell students what they will be learning before the lesson begins and you can raise student achievement as much as 27 percent. This Election Day all staff will have an opportunity to do a learning objective deep dive with their colleagues and will begin implementation thereafter. As per ADVANCE, teachers in our school are minimally observed 4 times per year (Highly Effective 3 times). During these observations, administrators capture learning objectives routinely, and will provide feedback on their rigor, standards alignment, and will provide feedback on how the tasks observed match the objective, and how teachers differentiate tasks and pull small groups to meet students at multiple entry points. Varied use of instructional groups, and the intentional grouping of students to support engagement reside in components 1e and 3c of the Danielson Framework. Alignment of rigorous objectives and tasks lives in components 1e and 3c as well. The work of differentiation is of particular importance because data from the 2017-2018 state ELA exams shows that not all subgroups are making adequate gains, in both ELA and Mathematics. A review of data also shows us that students below benchmark need more targeted instruction at their level to meet their needs, to close the gap between what they know and the skills they still need progress to the next level. In short, they require a sub-objective tailored to their next steps. This is particularly true for ELLs and SWDs who require specially designed and modified instruction to meet their unique needs. Likewise, students performing on and above grade level need targeted instruction to push them to the next level. The same data driven practices apply to all of our learners and ensure that we meet their varied needs As such, this year we will continue to address the ways in which teachers can use multiple data sources to meet the needs of diverse learners, plan thoughtful small groups with sub-objectives, and also how we are ensuring objective and task alignment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 3  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of teachers will write clear, student friendly learning objectives so that students can monitor their own learning as evidenced by round two (November), 3 (December), and 4 (Jan/Feb) observation data in domains 1a, 1e, 3c, 3d and/or in commendations and next steps. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Minimally one administrator attends district wide Professional Learning around learning objectives. Social Studies, ELA, Math and Science ambassadors attend district wide Professional Learning around learning objectives and will turn key to administration. School wide professional development around learning objective writing on Election Day and thereafter as needed. Staff Grade level days with TC Staff Developer centered around strategies and tools for planning small group instruction (sub objectives) that meets the needs of students at all levels. Ex. Guided Reading, Shared Reading, Word Study. Resources to support this work will be shared via Google Drive. Grade level days with w/ Metamorphosis centered around guided mini lessons (data driven small groups/sub objectives) that aim to: Unpack math content/big ideas with teachers Develop strategies to help students access the content Develop use of models to demonstrate student thinking Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration September, Administration October Ambassadors October Ambassadors/ administration Administration Administration, Staff Developers November 6, 2018 Sept 2018-June 2019, monthly and/or bi-monthly All K-5 teachers, ENL providers, and SETSS teacher ,where applicable Administration, Staff Developers All K-5 teachers, ENL providers and SETSS teacher, where applicable Sept 2018-June 2019, monthly and/or bi-monthly Administration participates in above meetings to be able to give targeted feedback on implementation (of above) in formal and informal observations year long. APs, Principal Sept 2018-June 2019, weekly Administration Across grade levels, content areas, and specialities, administration observes and provides targeted feedback on instruction through the lens of 1E and 3C, particularly: How the intentional organization of instructional groups supports student learning, how the groupings of students are suitable to the activities and how objectives are written in student-friendly language, and how tasks are aligned to these rigorous objectives. All teachers Administration Sept 2018-June 2019, weekly 5  Based on round 1 and 2 of observation data, teachers who still need support with objective writing and small group instruction will be provided with additional support ex. Inter-visitation using the 3,2,1 Protocol: three things I noticed, two things I will implement, and one question I have. Across PK-5 classrooms, teachers will make use of the BASIC data analysis protocol in team meetings to systematically and collaboratively analyze student work with colleagues, plan corrective instruction for small groups, re-teach, and repeat the cycle when necessary. A subgroup of students whose lack of reading growth is linked to their engagement with high interest texts that they can't put down, and who would benefit from extra adult attention to their reading, will participate in a Reading Club wherein they check out high interest books from a high interest library. Special Educators will examine data through the lens of Specially Designed Instruction and will pair and group students accordingly to meet their unique and/or shared IEP driven needs (IEP goals). Support will be provided through our SESIS 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All teachers All teachers Administration Administration February 2019-June 2019, weekly as needed November 2018-June 2019, weekly Approximately 40 Students, Grades 1-5 Sept 2018-June 2019, weekly Administration Special Educators Ongoing, monthly Special Educators, SESIS, Special Education Liaison How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the course of the school year, parent workshops will be held aimed to support families in unpacking curriculum, standards, and pedagogical approaches that support deep learning (ie. small groups). Ex. The first of such workshops is held in September. This is a Curriculum Overview for all families and will include math workshops for each grave level. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Human/Resources Professional development: Partnership with Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, and Metamorphosis (Math PD) Funding for substitute teachers or cluster teacher to cover teachers for professional development. Funding to reduce class size on grades 1, 2, & 4 to increase teacher student 1:1 and small group interactions   Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A 6  X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, administrators will have completed at least two rounds of observations for all staff, providing feedback on strength of the learning objective (ex. student friendly, measurable, rigorous) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Part 5b. By February 2019, a random sample of 10 APPR reports will show evidence of feedback on strengths/next steps of learning objective (ex. student friendly, measurable, rigorous) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Between 2015 and 2018, 100% of pedagogical staff (classroom and cluster teachers, paraprofessionals and lead teachers) received professional development training in the Responsive Classrooms methodology. In the third year of the school’s partnership with Responsive Classrooms, we know that the school year began with 100% of teachers starting the day with morning meeting, established cool down zones, and modified youth behavior through positive framing. We have met our goal of reducing the reported pushing/shoving incidents in OORS across the school from 45% to 35%. In 2017-2018, there were 178 incidents of pushing and shoving. Seventeen children are responsible for 42% of the 178 incidents entered into OORS. We want to reduce both the the number of incidents and the number of children responsible for multiple incidents of pushing/shoving (recidivism). Last school year, the administration, guidance team and behavior specialists observed classroom culture and school-wide transitions. They found that school culture would benefit from clear, school-wide expectations, and school wide routines to support those expectations. In 2018-2019 our goal is to establish clear school wide expectations and routines and to track and develop a proactive plan to reduce the recidivist behaviors (Tiers 2 and 3) where deeper supports are developed for those children and their teachers. We are especially interested in instituting mentorship peers between upper and lower grade students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the number of youth who have been identified as chronic pushers and shovers (Tier 2-3 behaviors) school will go down by 10% as per OORS data. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Staff Development and Staff Supports: recidivist youth and their teachers Sept. 2018 - October 2018 Admin team, lunchroom coordinator, guidance team Identifying and tracking youth with repeat entries (more than 4) in OORS for pushing/shoving. Train teachers, guidance, admin and other child study team members to develop and track a proactive plan for these students. all staff all staff All staff will participate in defining school culture prior to the beginning of the school year. all teachers Sept. 2018 Sept. 2018 Sept. 2018 Staff will be provided with starter lessons for the first 10 days of school where the day is devoted to building a positive classroom community, internalizing school wide values and baseline assessments for differentiated groups and student goal setting. All teachers will receive The First Six Weeks of School and a minimum of three PD/collaborative work sessions to apply strategies and structures to their classrooms and the school community. One PD session per month will be devoted to classroom and school culture. Admin team Admin team, lunchroom coordinator, guidance team, parent coordinator Admin team, lunchroom coordinator, guidance team, parent coordinator Staff Development and Staff Support cont. school aides Sept. 2018 School aides will be trained in youth development and conflict resolution. School aides will be supervised and observed by assistant principals who will provide feedback on performance using school-wide expectations as a guide. classroom teachers all staff Sept. 2018 - June 2018 monthly admin, parent coordinator admin admin and guidance PS 139 will engage an outside behavior coach to provide teachers with strategies through observation and modeling. teachers Sept. 2018 - admin, guidance parent coordinator Admin and Guidance will define a set of suggested strategies and action steps for youth who are not observing school-wide expectations. after school providers and other June 2019 weekly admin, guidance parent coordinator 9  Teacher’s lounge may be relocated to 208 and the space will be re-designed to promote teacher wellness, collaboration and reflection depending on room availability. Provide training to after-school providers in the school-wide values and hold accountable for their implementation after 2:30pm. school partners staff and students Oct. 2018 admin, guidance parent coordinator Specialized Interventions and Crisis Support Students in crisis will be referred to at risk counseling and/or possible on site school mental health clinic. Child study teams (admin, guidance, etc.) will determine additional supports for children and families. Supports may include Music Therapy, sports team membership, after school programs and mentoring through community based organizations, etc.. Youth and Family Programs Girls and Boys empowerment circles will continue. Possibly launching 2 cycles per group. Students in crisis and their families Oct 2018-June 2019 as needed Child Study Teams Oct 2017-June 2018 Admin and Guidance Guidance & Lunchroom Coordinator, School Psychologist, Admin weekly At-risk fourth and fifth grade girls and boys and October 2018-Jan. 2019 as needed Guidance Counselor Phys Ed Instructors & Outside organization Music Therapist Guidance and Lunch Room Coordinator Feb. 2018- June 2019 weekly Oct 2017-June 2018 Guidance and Lunch Room Coordinator monthly Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator & Admin Youth sports teams and access to A/S programs for low income families will expand. Tier III students At-risk students PreK-5 All students PreK-5 All students PreK-5 All parents/ guardians of students PreK-5 Music therapy will establish goals and track results. The school will find a small dedicated space so that a therapist can continue seeing small groups of students. TrailBlazers will facilitate collaborative play and conflict resolution at recess and during a sliding scale A/S program. School wide gatherings to acknowledge student of the month and companion celebrations at PA meetings. Family workshops on school wide expectations and how to integrate expectations into life at home. (Healthy routines, Positive Play, respecting boundaries) Engage with support organizations that can assist in upgrading play in the yard and lunch transitions. Work with students and arts teachers to create strong visual statements of values across the school and as murals in the school yard. Work with New York Cares to repaint the surface of the school yard for more organized and more attractive play spaces 0  Engage families and teachers to pressure city to remediate playground equipment (slides/monkey bars/hoops) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. -Monthly Family Fun Day -Parent Workshops -Monthly Newsletters (1 per grade) will be sent home to families (translated) -Parent Volunteer opportunities within the school -Individual parent meetings as necessary Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Supplies to support the initiative (paint for murals, banners, signage) Supplies to initiate teacher lounge (bulletin boards, tables, chairs)    Guidance counselors, Lunch Room Coordinator and School Aids  NYC Children's Theater Workshop fees  Per Session for after-school groups  Music Therapy program through Brooklyn Conservatory  Recess support fees to school partner Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a reduction of 5% in pushing/shoving incidents in OORS. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS reports, classroom observations 1  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A strength indicated by the 2017 - 2018 NYC School Survey: teachers feel there is time to collaborate in order to improve instructional practice. Another strength is that most teachers feel that professional development has been sustained and focused. However, there is still an opportunity to improve as teachers still see this as an area of improvement, especially in the area of using targeted professional development. Targeted professional development that is differentiated will more efficiently improve capacity, knowledge base and pedagogy across the school, allowing for maximum impact on student progress and growth. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of classroom teacher teams will participate in targeted professional development sessions in reading, writing, and math. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Cabinet reviews data from June 2017: All Teachers August 2018 Principal and AP's August/September 2018 Staff Developers, Principal, Assistant Principals Teachers completed their 2018-2019 preference sheet to determine which grade they want to teach Teachers completed a survey reflecting on 2017-2018 school year professional development. Grade-level teams meet with the previous grade level to learn about the students of the grade. Dual Language consultant meets bi-weekly with Dual Language team Using reflection data, teachers identified goals for their professional development for the 2018-2019 school year. Teachers met with the principal and their AP for their end of year summative conference to reflect on their observation data and goals for the year. Cabinet plans targeted pd with consultants: consultants Sept 2018 Principal and AP's Administrative cabinet speaks with consultants to have everyone to create coherent vision in reading, writing, and math. Administrative cabinet met with consultants (Metamorphosis and TCRWP) to map out 2018-2019 professional development sessions. Resource library is being created to memorialize the work being done (ex. Photo, video, plans). All Teachers Sept 2018- All teachers June 2019 All teachers as needed Admin and teachers that work with ELLs Oct/Nov 2018, Jan/Feb 2019, April/May 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals Principal and APs Principal and APs Admin, Continuous Learning Fellows, and coach Teachers met with the principal and grade level AP to identify goals for the 2018-2019 school year.' K teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 monthly 4 Admin will assess if changes need to be made in PD groups. Administrators will collect data through their observations of the teachers. Feedback is then given to teachers and staff developers to focus professional development. Adjust structure of PD days to meet teacher team need where appropriate Continue to be a Continuous Learning Fellows school Create a school improvement team led by fellows The team will lead rapid cycles of learning on an authentic problem of practice related to ELLs using improvement science principles and tools. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Family Fun Day is held monthly so that parents experience the classroom environment Grade-wide Parent Workshops will be conducted to present information to families (academic, social-emotional) regarding the progress made by teachers working together Teachers will collaborate in grade teams to share math curriculum games with parents on Curriculum Night. Meet and Greets will be held to give an overview of progress made by teacher teams. The Arts Team will share curriculum standards with families by sending home monthly newsletters that highlight the focus for each month. The Arts Team will collaborate and present shared performances that showcase curriculum standards across disciplines (art & music). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff developers   Professional development materials  Monday afternoon PD sessions/Tuesday professional duty time.   OTPS (Other than Personnel Services) professional development contracts Substitute teachers to cover teachers for related Professional Development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 5  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019:  75% of classroom teachers will have participated in at least 2 professional activities with least one of their professional development groups. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher observations will measure progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2017-2018 NYC School Survey indicates a need for improvement in certain areas aligned to Effective School Leadership. Specifically, teachers require a deeper understanding of how programs offered are connected to their school's instructional vision, and more follow up upon initiation of new programs to make sure they are working. In the category of Teacher Influence however, 83% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that, at their school, the principal/school leader encourages feedback through regular meetings with parent and teacher leaders. This year we will have a Model Teacher classroom, a vertical Teacher Leadership Team, and will grow our vertical Continuous Learning Team. We aim to leverage this influence to create more curricular cohesion, and vertical articulation in the 2018/2019 School Year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be improved coherence and inclusion in the implementation of initiatives as measured by a 5% improvement on the NYC School Survey by teachers. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Grow Continuous Learning Cohort to include 5 more teachers across grades K-5. This work focus on data analysis to drive quick changes with speedy turnaround to improve student outcomes. Leverage our Grade 4 Model Teacher to showcase practices aligned to instructional focus, and school wide initiatives, and to provide feedback and coaching. Teacher Cohort, classroom teachers. Targeted teachers Sept 2018 to June 2019 Admin and Continuous Learning Team bimonthly Sept 2018 to June 2019 Admin, Model Teacher weekly Leverage our vertical Teacher Leadership Team to message school wide instructional initiatives on their grades/grade bands, and to provide feedback and coaching. Teacher Leaderships Team Sept 2018 to June 2019 weekly Admin Teacher teams, both grade level and vertical, will make use of the BASIC Protocol for Data Analysis to ensure All teachers Additional Organizational Structures to Support this Work: Admin Team, Cabinet Meetings and 1:1 Principal & Assistant Principal meetings to touch base on implementation and follow through of school wide initiatives, and to determine concrete next steps. teachers, staff developers Admin Admin team Sept 2018 to June 2019 weekly Sept 2018 to June 2019 weekly Planning conferences with individual teachers to set yearly individual professional goals, and message school wide goals. Grade level meetings, and vertical team meetings to carry out data analysis work aligned to initiatives. Principal and Assistant Principals co-plan and sit in on all Professional Development sessions in ELA and Math and actively participate in sessions to practice new learning/initiatives with teachers and students. Admin and teacher leadership group follows up to support and help w/ implementation. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 8  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will lead parent workshops on curriculum and instruction to share progress made across the school. Actively increase parent and teacher participation in School Leadership Teams. Share school wide values and routines adopted by staff with families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. parent coordinator Survey/evaluation plan for communications Support team Extended Day Other Duty Time supplies OTPS (Other Than Personnel for Communication) costs per session and per diem Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, there will be a 55% positive result on an internal survey regarding communication. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. internal survey data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS 139 has a robust history of parent involvement. Many events have strong attendance including Curriculum Night, parent teacher conferences, Science Night, Multi-Cultural Night and movie nights. This year the new summer camp fair had strong attendance and the disaster relief fundraiser was also well attended. PA meetings and parent workshops (esp after January) have shown a steep decline in participation, especially among families who speak languages other than English. There has also been an increase in families seeking support with issues that affect youth success and family health from the guidance team and the parent coordinator. Our goal is to boost engagement by better coordinating outside supports and resources for families in need and to improve school access for families who speak languages other than English. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will see a 10% increase in family involvement by the number of families attending SLT/PA meetings, culture breakfasts, Family Fun Days and parent workshops as measured by sign in sheets. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent events are held throughout the year to reach parents at multiple entry points through a variety of interests: All Parents Science Family Night, Arts Night, Curriculum Night, music concerts, Field Days, Book Fairs, Readers Parade, Summer Camp Fair, and so on. Family Fun Day is held once a month. Parents are invited to participate in classroom activities All Parents Communication to school community through multiple pathways: website, family board, newsletter, Facebook, Parent Volunteer program, ELL Progress Reports, backpack and IEP Progress Reports All Parents Targeted meetings are held to provide information and increase engagement: New Families Breakfast, IEP Breakfast, ENL Breakfast A family handbook at each grade cohort will be developed and translated into multiple languages. Parents of new admits, ELLs and SWDs All Parents Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Principal, Arts Teachers, APs, Science Teachers, Phys. Ed. Teachers Parent Coordinator & APs, Parent Association Parent Coordinator, Tech Committee October 2018-May 2019 monthly October 2018-May 2019 monthly at least Sept. 2017-June 2018 as needed Dec 2018 & February 2019 Parent Coordinator, Principal, ENL Coordinator & Sp Ed Coordinator Parent Coordinator and APs. Nov 2018 1  Identify additional language liaisons to Improve the system for translating core documents and interpreting at key school meetings. (2nd Spanish Liaison and Haitian Creole Liaison). Bilingual parents 3 annual specific language breakfasts (in 4 target languages) with principal and parent coordinator held throughout the year Cook Shop for parents (six cook shop sessions) are held to teach parents nutritious , simple recipes where parents are engaged in hands on cooking. Family Cook Shop is in both English and Spanish. Cornell Cooperative Extension will offer a similar course in Bengali/Urdu over 8 weeks (Oct-Jan). Garden to Cafe events annually. Adult education classes are offered on Saturdays to support English language learners. Special Adult Spanish club launched for staff and families seeking to learn Spanish School tours for prospective parents are offered from December to April, giving parents the opportunity to have a birds eye view of the classrooms and the PS 139 community. PreK to 5th grade parents Parents of ELLs All Parents Series of workshops are offered to guide parents with the middle school application process, positive plat conflict resolution and other need areas as identified by families Prospective Parents Oct 2018-June 2019 monthly Parent Coordinator and Parent Association Parent Coordinator with Liaisons December 2018 - May 2019 monthly Cook Shop Coordinators, Language Liaisons & the K & 1 AP Oct.2019 - June 2019 weekly December 2018 - March 2019 Office of Adult Education Parent Coordinator & administration monthly Sept. 2018 - March 2019 2  Participatory budgeting to engage students, families, and staff. This is the process in which parents, students, teachers, and staff brainstorm ideas to improve the school, and then students and parents voted to decide which ideas to fund with 10K budget -Designate a community room for family meetings and supports with adult education, housing issues, legal needs, benefits enrollment and more. 4th and 5th Parents as needed April 2019 Parent Coordinator, APs, Guidance Counselors Parent Coordinator, Guidance, PA All parents -Seek out new roles for parent volunteers across the school (ex-hall monitor, culture booster, or Four Square specialist at recess) -Create volunteer badges/T-shirts and a volunteer orientation. -Establish a network of parent leaders (at each grade level) across all classrooms to serve as ambassadors of school culture and conduits for school information. School Community -Deepen connection to local organizations and city resources that support immigrant families and families in poverty: NHS, CAMBA, MOIA, COPO, Mixteca, PAYS. All parents All parents Sept & Oct 2018 Principal, PA and Parent Coordinator Sept/Oct 2018 weekly Admin and Parent Coordinator Sept 2018/June 2019 monthly Parent Coordinator 3  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. CAMBA, Mixteca, CookShop, Cornell Cooperative Extension, COPO Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. per session for workshops per session for child care parent coordinator refreshments and information at tours, meetings, etc. Cook Shop workshops translations and interpreters guidance counselors OTPS for materials Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 7 Breakfasts, 4 workshops and 3 Family Fun Days will be held as measured by sign-in sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign-in sheets will be used to measure attendance and determine whether progress is being made. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students reading belowgrade levels Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Independent & guided reading Students that score below Level 3 on the NYSELAassessment Reading Rescue 1:1 Individualized Reading Support Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) One-to-one conferencing/small group.Extra time on task One-to-one students reading below grade level Test Sophistication Strategies small group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) during and after school day during and after school day during and after school day Fundations/Reading Plus small group/one-to-one during and after school day Mathematics Students performing below grade level Independent & guided practice One-to-one conferencing/small group after school/during the school day Students that score below Level 3 on theNYSMath assessment Test sophistication strategies after school/during the school day Extra time on task in small groups 5  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students that do not meet grade level expectations on theNYSScience assessment Students that are not performing on grade level Students conduct hands-on experiments using the scientificmethod Independent & guided reading Small group Small group during the school day during school/after school Students that need additional support for behavioral concerns Counseling to improve academic skills and social-emotional growth Boysand Girls Empowerment Groups Counselors rungroupsto improve academic skills and social-emotional growth Small group/one-to-one during school day Group of 15 afterschool Tier III at-risk students Music Therapy Brooklyn Conservatory of Music therapist one-to-one and small group up to 5 6  during the school day 7  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 104 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students are seen by a grade-appropriate guidance counselor who will monitor students' progress and meet with the students and families on an as-needed basis. Students have access to all programs that are run within the school: chess, art, music, dance, enrichment and at-risk services, etc. School materials and basic clothing is provided, as needed, as is admission for trips and senior activities. If busing is needed, the school works with the parent to ensure the appropriate service is provided. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 8  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 9  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Administration and teachers attend hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly qualified teachers Mentors and buddy teachers are assigned to new teachers. Teachers are supported in attaining qualification and attend professional development. Assistant principals are assigned teams of teachers by grade level. Common meeting times are built into prep schedule. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). A PD plan was developed based on survey, observation, and student data. Consultants (such as Teachers College/ Metamorphosis/Responsive Classroom) provide professional development to study groups, vertical teams, grade teams, and individual teachers. Paraprofessionals are trained in Reading Rescue, Fundations and behavior strategies. Please see activities in each goal for specifics. Teachers are attending specialty area pd at TC and turn keying that information. Other teachers are providing pd in areas in which they excel. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 0  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Programs are invited to bring students and parent to tour the school. Neighboring PreK programs are invited to school events. A school team will visit neighboring programs. PAS and Parent Coordinator provide transition services. Parent tours are held in the winter. New Parent Breakfast is held in mid September during which staff, such as the guidance counselors, assistant principals, parent coordinator, etc. are introduced. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Choices of multiple assessment measures were introduced at faculty conference along with requirements. A school based committee attended DOE training which was turn-keyed to staff. Each grade level chose a representative to sit on the school-wide committee. The choices were rolled out at a faculty conference where the options were explained. The committee reported back to the staff with the rationale for the final choice. PD was done through grade level meetings with both coaches and administration 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 1  Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 689020 36652 22222 13682 5596091 x x x x x 5A (3a&b),5B(3a&b), 5C(3a&b), 5D(3a&b) & 5E(3a&b) 5A(3a&b) & 5C(3a&b) 5A (3a&b),5B(3a&b), 5C(3a&b), 5D(3a&b) & 5E(3a&b) 5A (3a&b),5B(3a&b), 5C(3a&b), 5D(3a&b) & 5E(3a&b) 5A, B, C, D & E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2   Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 3  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community at. P.S. 139 Alexine A. Fenty, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between PS 139 Alexine A. Fenty and its families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the PS 139 Alexine A. Fenty School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 139 will support the parents and families of all its students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for PS 139 staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the PS 139 school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality 4  PS 139’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The PS 139 school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with all parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the PS 139’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of PS 139’s Parent Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the PS 139 Title I program as outlined in the PS 139's Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in PS 139’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between PS 139 and its families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend PS 139K and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting in September 2017 to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about PS 139’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 5   encouraging meaningful parent participation on the PS 139 School Leadership Team, Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS139K, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, ESSA, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between PS 139 and its families. PS 139 staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by ESSA; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of PS 139l’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, PS 139 Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the PS 139 Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year;  ensuring that PS 139K staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff with limited English speaking parents; 6   notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the PS 139K school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents at PS 139K;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in the PS 139K Compact and Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform PS 139K when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow PS 139K school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the PS 139 or District 22; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the PS 139 Parent Involvement Policy and Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the PS 139K, District 22, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the PS 139’s Parent Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn.         7  8  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Activity 1 – Title III After-school Program This activity targets ELL students that are 1 year below benchmark per T.C. assessments in grades 3-5. Group size is 15 students per group and there is 1 group per grade (for a total of 3 groups). Serves 30 ELLs in grades 3, 4 & 5, Wednesdays & Thursdays, 2:30 to 3:30, for 16 sessions. The program will be offered from November-February. Teachers will provide small group instruction, students grouped according to T.C. reading levels, focused on ELA instruction embedding NYSESLAT supplementary instructional strategies. Three certified ENL teachers will provide direct instruction. Language of instruction is English. Anticipated measurable outcomes will be an increase of 2-3 F&P levels for 80% of the participating students. Authentic literature, both fiction and non-fiction, is used in the supplemental program. A balanced literacy approach is also utilized which supplements and complements our core instructional program. Activity 2 – After school At-Risk Long term ELL Program This activity targets students who are at-risk of being long-term ELLs in grades 4 and 5. One bridged group of 25 students in 4th and 5th grade will participate. Many of our long term ELLs have IEPs. The program will run from February to April for 25 sessions with groups meeting for 90 minutes 2 times a week, Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30 to 4:00. This program will focus on increasing reading stamina, enhance critical thinking skills and building reading comprehension. The language of instruction is English. One certified ENL teacher, one certified special education and a general education will provide direct instructional services. Anticipated measurable outcome will be 70% of participating students will attain proficiency . Activity 3 – Title III Lower Grade After School program including dual language students This activity targets ELLs that are 1 year below benchmark per TC assessments in grades K - 2 (servicing approximately 80 students). Three certified ENL teachers will provide direct instruction. Group size is 10 students per group and there is 1 group per teacher (for a total of 3 groups). It will serve 30 ELLs. Wednesday, Thursday & Friday, 2:30 to 3:30, for 27 sessions per teacher. The program will be offered November to April. Provide small group instruction, students grouped according to T.C. reading levels, focused on ELA instruction embedding NYSESLAT supplementary instructional strategies. Language of instruction is English. Anticipated measurable outcomes will be an increase of 2-3 T.C. levels for 80% of the participating students. Authentic literature, both fiction and non-fiction, are used in the supplemental program. A balanced literacy approach is also utilized which supplements and complements our core instructional program. Activity 4 – ELL Newcomer Student Program - This activity targets ELL students with newcomer status, on a continuing basis through the school year. One group of up to 20 students in grades K-5. The program will run from October to May for 40 sessions with groups meeting for 40minutes 2 times a week, Wednesdays, Thursdays & Fridays from 7:30 to 8:10 AM. A certified ENL teacher will provide small group instruction, students grouped according to assessed need focused on basic language acquisition and ELA instruction embedding cultural and social tools to assist students in the 0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information transition to a hew community. Language of instruction is English. the outcome will be that pre-emergent or emergent readers, as per F&P levels, will become independent readers. The bilingual educators in our school are invited to teach these after school programs to offer home language support for students and their families. Furthermore, our school has materials in Spanish to be implemented in our programs to assist ELLs in the four modalities. For example, we have Fiction and Non-fiction books in Spanish, and Teacher's College Curriculum has Running Record Assessments in Spanish. Students who qualify for the programs will be notified weeks before the after school programs begin. ENL teachers, bilingual educators and bilingual staff can work together to create translated invitations. These translated invitations inform parents of the after school program offerings and how they can enroll their children. At the beginning of each session, attendance will be taken by the teacher. Teachers will forward the attendance to the designated after school administrative director and kept on file. ENL teachers will use data from the most recent RLAT and NYSESLAT exam scores in order to determine eligibility and placement. Teachers will also use data from student scores on the NYSESLAT in order to determine which modalities to target in after school programs. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: All teachers providing Title III direct instructional services receive professional development. Topics and dates include: * On-site PD for 2 periods on each of 25 days (September through June) facilitated by Teacher’s College. This PD is cycled (6-week cycles) and based on needs determined by individual teachers and selected from a menu. Topics include components of balanced literacy, conferring, small group instruction, struggling readers and more. Support provided to all teachers working with the ELL population. * "ENL Strategies and Best Practices for Teachers of ELLs." Two 80 minute workshops. Providers: ENL teachers). * Ongoing monthly network support by Brooklyn South Borough Support. Support provided to ELL providers. * "Figuring Out How to Move Kids Who Are Below Benchmark." Full-day workshops provided off-site at Teacher's College * "Moving Struggling Readers Grades 2-5." Half-day workshops provided on-site by Teacher's College. Administration will keep sign-in sheets and agendas on file for all professional developments attended by teachers. $4,500 TIII is the entire cost to TIII. 1  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: 1. New Families Breakfast: September 14, 2018. A 90 minute workshop that introduces key staff (admin, parent coordinator, ENL teachers, guidance counselors, SBST, and youth development team) and school procedures at the start of the school year. Translation will be provided in Spanish, Urdu, Bengali and Haitian-Creole. 2. Parent Workshops. Following workshops offered to ELL parents to impact higher achievement by providing support on a variety of topics. Events are listed on the school's monthly calendar and website for parents. * Curriculum Night/ENL Orientation: September 17, 2018 * Dual Language Meet & Greet: September 2018 * NYSESLAT Information: March 2019 * "Behavior Management: The Home-School Connection": October 2018 * " ELA and Math Parent Workshop: March 2019 * "How to Support your Child at Home: September 17, 2018 3. ELL Parent Support Group. Ongoing 45 minute workshops, to maintain open lines of communication with ELL parents. Topics covered are various ways to support your child at home and to respond to any questions or concerns that may arise throughout the school year. Parent Liaisons work with the Parent Coordinator to reach families in Spanish, Urdu, and Bengali. A liaison who speaks Haitian Creole will be added. Each language group will have a breakfast to improve outreach. 4. Saturday Adult ENL - a four hour class held every Saturday for 20 parents of PS 139 ELL students from October 2018 to June 2019. Focus on English language development for daily living and basic literacy skills. Instruction provided by an ENL teacher through the Office of Adult Learning at no cost to Title III. Parent letters were sent home with students and the class is listed on the school's monthly calendar for parents. The purpose of workshops/breakfasts is to bridge connections between school and home. We want to ensure that parents understand what ENL is, and how their students will be supported in the classrooms. Parents will sign in at each workshop they attend. These sign-in sheets and agendas will be kept on file. 2 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 22 School Name Alexine A Fenty Borough Brooklyn School Number K13 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Mary McDonald Coach n/a ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Farah Shihadeh/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Patricia Reilly/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Ashley Cunningham/ENL Related-Service Provider n/a Superintendent n/a Assistant Principal Sarah Gobin-Darrell Coach n/a School Counselor n/a Parent Megan Demarkis Parent Coordinator n/a Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 6 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 4 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 910 4 Total number of ELLs 172 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 18.90%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Lang. Span Span Span School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2014-5 2015-16 2016-17 & 2017- K 1 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 Tot # 0 0 0 1 1 2 4 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At P.S. 139, we use the Teachers College Reading Assessment (accuracy, fluency, and comprehension) three times per year, and monitor progress with informal running records monthly. In Kindergarten through Grade 2, we also use additional assessments to assess letter/sound recognition, sight words, phonics, phonemic awareness and early literacy behaviors. In addition, we use on-demand writing prompts for Narrative, Opinion, and Informational writing. Furthermore, we pull data from the EDAT to address specific needs of ELLs (at risk indicators, subgroups, language, assessment performance levels/graphics, etc.) We have noticed that our ELLs in general fall below their grade level peers in both reading and writing. It is clear that a majority of our ELLs are unable to decode, comprehend and read grade level texts with fluency at this time. We use this data to help us form groupings of students for small group instruction, RTI, extended day, after-school programs, and to support classroom, ENL services and material selection. 5  We will ensure that classroom teachers, ENL providers, and additional service providers check in more frequently with these specific students. Additionally, targeted reading instruction, through guided reading will be necessary to support growth. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? ENL and classroom teachers co-plan and collaborate in order to provide targeted and individualized instructional support for ELLs based on the outcome of the aforementioned assessments. All grade bands have at least one common prep, where they can meet to plan and discuss strategies. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? At the beginning of each instructional writing unit, an on-demand assessment is given to determine students’ prior knowledge about various subjects. At the end of each writing unit, an on-demand writing assessment is given to students to track their progress over the course of the unit. Teacher's College rubrics associated with each, and students' writing traits are assessed. These rubrics are used to identify the areas of needs for each writing unit. Small groups are created based on a specific writing need. The classroom teacher and ENL teacher collaborate to create a small group cycle. In reading, students are tested with Teacher's College Running records to track reading level progress. Running record data is tracked in "TC Assessment Pro" in which all teachers and specialists have access to view. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? ENL teachers review data together and collaborate with classroom teachers in order to create instructional groupings. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] At the start of the school year, we review State data, F&P benchmark assessments, and on-demand writing assessments. Based upon all of the data reviewed, we determine the specific tier 1 activities within the classroom appropriate for each student. In addition, we invite any student in need to our extended day programs (tier 2 intervention). We determine the ENL services needed by each student, as well as support in ELA, or math (or a combination). Students are re-assessed throughout the year to determine continuation of tier 1/tier 2 or if tier 3 intervention is necessary. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data from NYSESLAT and RLAT is used when scheduling students. All ELLs and FELLs receive ENL services according to CR Part 154 and is reflected in STARS Programming. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our students are grouped heterogeneously, unless their parents select our dual language program. Students are further grouped for ENL services to support their language development in reading, writing, listening, and speaking. Within the classroom and ENL groupings, all teachers further ensure linguistic needs are met by: promoting cooperative learning, using accountable talk stems during turn and talks, teachers encourage student choice for writing topics, teachers encourage student choice in independent reading, teachers provide authentic resources for reading in fiction and informational, providing students with hands-on experiences, technology is utilized through listening centers, SmartBoards, and computers (with specific software to enhance learning). Part IV: ELL Programming 6  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Freestanding ENL program - ENL teachers use the RLAT document to view a student’s English proficiency level. Next, ENL teachers use CR Part 154.2 to determine the number of minutes students require, as well as whether or not the instruction is stand-alone and/or integrated. Students who are entering or emerging are placed in general education classes with English dominant peers, as well as other mixed proficiency levels: transitioning, expanding. For integrated ENL, the ENL teacher implements the same content as the common branch/special education teacher but provides ENL/language acquisition methodologies. Stand-alone ENL is provided for students who are entering and emerging only. Students work on language acquisition skills as well as vocabulary building. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. Dual language teachers use information from the RLAT to determine groups for reading, writing, and word study sessions. The dual language teachers use CR Part 154.2 to determine the amount of minutes students require, as well as whether or not the instruction is stand-alone and/or integrated. The teachers work together in a vertical cohort to develop program cards and lessons. The teachers meet weekly with a dual language consultant and engage in professional development workshops. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students receive the number of ENL mandated minutes based on their latest NYSITELL or NYSESLAT scores. Entering and Emerging students receive 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL in the content area of ELA. Transitioning and Expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL through the content area of ELA. Commanding students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL through the content area of ELA. ENL students' schedules and minutes are programmed in STARS according to their mandates. In the dual language classes the students receive HLA instruction during the time allocated for Spanish instruction. We use the roller coaster model and follow a two week cycle (English morning, Spanish afternoon, (next day) Spanish morning, English afternoon). The students receive weekly HLA support for 180 minutes during Spanish ELA instruction (Estrellita (word study), reading, and writing). 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. P.S. 139 Alexine A. Fenty utilizes Teachers College curriculum for reading and writing workshop. The structure of the mini-lesson has a connection, naming of teaching point, teacher modeling, active engagement, and a link to send students to try the work of the mini lesson independently. In addition, ENL teachers include a language objective within each lesson. In order to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Standards, students are allocated time to practice their language skills (comprehensible output) by participating in peer work. For example, during readers workshop, students have time to talk in partnerships and during turn-and-talks; students practice using content specific language with support from their teacher. Furthermore, students have time on a daily basis to partner read. Throughout the day, students are provided with a number of language scaffolds; namely: sentence frames and starters, visuals to support language and 7  vocabulary building, TPR, expressive teacher talk, heavy modeling, visual sight words, role-playing, individual student charts to reinforce content, yes/no questions (for beginner ELLs in silent period) and embedded answer questions. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The students in our dual language classes are assessed in both English and Spanish throughout the year. They have assessments in reading, writing, word study, math, science, and social studies during the year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status ENL teachers service students for integrated ENL during reading and writing workshop. ENL teachers co-teach with classroom teachers to create lessons that support ELLs and FELLs during the mini-lesson. Former ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL services per week for two years after scoring Commanding on the NYSESLAT. Former ELLs receive small group instruction that supports the content and linguistic demands of the lesson. Newcomer students are placed in general education classes. Teachers pair newcomers with other students who share a home language in order to create translanguaging opportunities. ENL teachers scaffold reading and writing lessons with visuals, realia, vocabulary, anchor charts, and lower level texts. Additionally, ENL teachers utilize resources such as "Reading A-Z" and "News ELA" for resources in students' home languages and to make content comprehensible. Newcomers receive Reading Rescue (1:1)services, as well as Fundations instruction. Students are invited to after school programs that will target specific needs. ENL Teachers service developing students during reading and writing workshop and also invite them to after school programs that will target their specific needs. Some strategies that ENL teachers use for developing students include: an explicit pre-teach of vocabulary, showing videos through Flocabulary, teacher modeling, hands-on learning opportunities, and partners who are more proficient in English. Developing students join small groups with an ENL teacher for an extension of the teaching point, targeted instruction in their identified area of need, or a re-teach of a lesson. ENL Teachers service Long term ELLs during reading and writing workshop and also invite them to after school programs that will target their specific needs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs follow the Teachers College Curriculum which is used school-wide. These teachers embed various strategies and methodologies into their instruction in order to provide appropriate access to academic content. Listening centers are available to provide support for those students who would benefit and who are in need additional support in that modality. Furthermore teachers are aware of decreasing teacher talk time and increasing comprehensible output in order for students to have many chances to practice speaking among peers. Other strategies and methods that teachers infuse to their instruction include but are not limited to: total physical response, technology/visual support/ realia, setting clear language objectives into lessons, and modified or adapted lessons. Special Education teachers and ENL teachers have a formal time set aside at least once per month to collaborate and discuss students’ growth. Aside from the formal time given, these teachers co-plan on a weekly basis. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 8  Teachers accommodate student needs by adjusting the Teacher's College units and lessons in order to meet where the students are. Some ELLs and SWDs are taught lessons from lower grade curricula depending on where they are in their language acquisition. Students are provided with scaffolds and tool kits to help them access the lessons and meet the objectives. ENL teachers use the integrated model in order to avoid pulling students from reading or writing and to avoid interruptions to their education. ENL teachers integrate into self-contained and ICT classrooms and use accommodations from each child's IEP to write their lessons. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We offer intervention services during the school day and after school. The services are offered in grades K-5. We offer most of our programs in English. In ELA, students who are performing below grade level receive Reading Rescue services. Reading Rescue is lead by trained, lead teacher assistants. This program targets students reading below grade level -they receive one on one services tailored to their needs -whether it be phonemic support, decoding strategies, fluency or comprehension skills. After school math programs are offered to support students who are below and approaching grade level. The content delivered to students are based on grade appropriate skills and strategies, delivered through small group instruction. ELL subgroups targeted are beginner and/or newcomer ELLs as well as ELLs that are at risk to become long term ELLs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are participating in the Continuous Learning Fellows DOE initiative. Two of our teachers will turn key new learning that will impact programming. Also, we have three classroom teachers that are participating in an ELL study group at Teachers College. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? n/a 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. We will provide after school programs for our ELLs that offers support in language acquisition skills thorough reading and writing. All ELLs will be offered a seat in the after school programs. The programs will have open enrolment, so ELLs who cannot attend during a certain time, will be re-offered a seat at another time to ensure equal access to the programs. All ELLs are eligible to join Arts, sports, and chess clubs/afterschool programs. All students in all K-5 classrooms are provided with a chess residency. In 3rd, 4th and 5th grades, all students participate in the Studio-in-a-School residency. All K and 1st grade students take part in a science/sustainability residency. In addition, all students have access to at-risk counseling. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We offer Title III after school for ELLs in all grades to give them more instructional support in English. To ensure that all ELLs have the opportunity to grow academically, we also have an after school program for immigrants under the Title III Immigrant Plan. The purpose of these ELL supplemental programs is to support students who are speakers of other languages in their acquisition of English through instruction. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? PS 139 has many instructional materials that are used to support ELLs. All of our classrooms are equipped with SMART Boards and ELMOs (document cameras). Some classrooms have iPads or tablets that support students' language instruction. These tablets have different applications that students can use to learn sounds, read books on their level, or play instructional games that help them learn English. Our classrooms also have other tangible materials, such as manipulatives, that help students learn science, math, and social studies. These hands-on materials help our ELLs learn the content. For example, we provide students with counting cubes and coins that help them during math instruction. Our Dual Language classes, as well as some 9  other classes, have books that are in both English and Spanish. Students, whose home language is Spanish, are able to read the Spanish version and then look at the English version to compare the languages. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Students are provided leveled books that are appropriate for their grade and age. They are given leveled books (which they get to change on a weekly basis.) Home language resources include glossaries in students’ home language, trans- languageing opportunities, and fiction and nonfiction books in various languages in classroom libraries. Students who receive stand alone ENL services are grouped based on grade level. For example, beginner kindergarten ELLs are pulled at the same time for stand alone services; beginner 1st grade ELLs are pulled at the same time for their stand alone services and so on. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? n/a 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We have a meet and greet session for newly enrolled ELLs and their families. The families meet with the admin team, ENL teachers, pupil accounting secretary, guidance counselor and parent coordinator. The families get a tour of the school and learn about ENL mandates. Parents of new ELLs are invited to the school to meet with their child's service provider where they can ask questions and get information from ENL teachers. The parent coordinator works with parents fluent in many of the languages spoken in our school, who act as ambassadors to the newly enrolled during the school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? n/a 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Our dual language classes are made up of both native English and Spanish speakers. The core content is taught in both languages. The teachers use the roller coaster model (50% of the instruction is in Spanish). a. self-contained side by side b. Spanish & English c. 50% in time blocks for each content area using a weekly schedule d. Both languages taught at the same time Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? A staff developer from Teacher’s College delivers Professional Development to ENL, bilingual, and common branch/special education teachers on site. The staff developer offers literacy strategies and scaffolds for teaching ELLs. Teacher’s College curriculum is aligned to Common Core Learning Standards. ENL teachers also have opportunities to attend district trainings regarding compliance, NYSESLAT, ELL identification, etc. 0  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ENL teachers keep a digital tracker of all professional development sessions attended throughout the school year as well as the focus, agenda, time, and amount of hours spent at each professional development. Furthermore, ENL teachers turnkey informational sessions to colleagues and create agendas that outline the focus of the turnkey. All members of professional development sign-in and the sign-in sheets are secured in the ENL office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ENL teachers contact parents of ELLs once a year for an in-person meeting that excludes parent-teacher conferences and parent orientation meetings. The ENL teacher sends a meeting request letter to a student's home. Meetings are typically held on Tuesdays during parent engagement time. ENL teachers, parents, and translators (if needed) discuss the child’s present level of progress in content and language. The translators are school personnel. The ENL teacher provides data that supports his/her conclusions about students’ progress. ENL teachers use NYSITELL or NYSESLAT data in the modalities of speaking, reading, writing, and listening. The teacher also discusses the goals of the program and the language development progress. The teacher updates the parents on the language proficiency assessment results for the child and the language development needs in all content areas. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ENL teachers host a NYSESLAT parent workshop each Spring before the NYSESLAT is given. Translated flyers are sent home to parents inviting them to join in the workshop. The workshop offers ways parents can help their children at home. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. ELLs take part in all activities that the school offers which greatly expand their experience. Chess, music, art, and dance are just some of the opportunities for enrichment. 1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Mary McDonald, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 139/Alexine A. Fenty School DBN: 22K139 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Mary McDonald Title Principal Sarah Gobin- Darrell Assistant Principal n/a Parent Coordinator Patricia Reilly ENL/Bilingual Teacher Megan Demarkis Parent n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Ashley Cunningham Other ENL Teacher Farah Shihadeh Other ENL Teacher n/a Other n/a Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 11/03/17 11/03/17 11/03/17 n/a 11/03/17 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 11/03/17 11/03/17 n/a 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 22K139 School Name: P.S. 139 Superintendent: Julia Bove The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Megan Demarkis Parent Coordinator No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. ATS data is culled from Home Language Identification Surveys and family interviews done by pedagogues during the registration process. ATS language reports are run to assess language preferences. Information is also gathered through anecdotal reports by teachers, the Parents Association, and the Parent Coordinator. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 4  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ARABIC BENGALI (BANGLA IN BANGLADESH) CROATIAN FRENCH HAITIAN CREOLE NEPALI ENGLISH PASHTO (A.K.A. PUSHTO) PUNJABI (A.K.A. PANJABI) RUSSIAN SENUFO SLOVAK SPANISH TIBETAN TURKISH URDU UZBEK Turkish Urdu Uzbek 2 89 1 11 49 2 3 19 11 995 4 1 3 2 1 466 2 2 89 1 0.66 2.95 0.12 0.18 1.14 0.66 59.9 0.24 0.06 0.18 0.12 0.06 28.06 0.12 0.12 5.36 0.06 13 48 1 2 24 13 978 4 1 3 2 1 468 2 2 98 1 0.78 2.89 0.06 0.12 1.44 0.78 58.88 0.24 0.06 0.18 0.12 0.06 28.18 0.12 0.12 5.9 0.06 .12 5.36 .06 2 98 1 .12 5.9 0.06 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 5  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Sept 2018 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translations are available through OSYD in ten languages including Spanish, Bengali, Urdu and Haitian Creole. Sept. 2018 Translation services are available through the DOE. Health and Safety -School safety drill notifications Registration Packet -Parent Coordinator Welcome Letter -Arrival/Dismissal procedures -Lunch forms -Consent forms -Reading Level survey Events -PA meetings -Parent workshops -Field Trips -New Parent orientations -Community events -school performances -Family engagement events -CEC/SLT meetings Sept. 2018 - June 2019 as needed Hard copies of fliers will be translated by parent liaisons for each of the 5 dominant language groups. Fliers will go home in backpacks and be posted in high traffic areas designated for parent communication. Digital postings distributed via website, Mailchimp and Facebook will utilize the Google Translate function. Hard copies of calendars will be translated by parent liaisons for each of the 5 dominant language groups. Fliers will go home in backpacks and be posted in high traffic areas designated for parent communication. Digital postings distributed via website, mailchimp and facebook will utilize the Google Translate function. Calendars "Save the date" (events and meetings) Sept. 2018 - June 2019 School Closures 6  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Academic Parent-teacher conferences Curriculum Night Sept & Nov. 2018 March & Jan. 2019 September 14, 2018 Parent Support Workshops New Parent Breakfast Special Ed and ELL Parent Support Breakfasts School engagement Annual Title I Parent Meeting interpretation service(s)? PS 139 works with an international school to provide interpreters during calendared events that occur in the evenings As needed, PS 139 will work with parent liaisons (new) who will stipends as per FACE rules and agree to provide translation/interpretation services at larger parent events and workshops Monthly PA meetings, September 15, 2017 Special Services IEP interviews Monthly September 2017though June 2018 On an as-needed basis - September 2018 though June 2019 Where possible an interpreter from the school faculty or staff will be present in IEP or other meetings where information is sensitive. When staff can not interpret, the school will use an over the phone translation service such as Language Line Solutions (888-763-3364) 7  teacher/guidance counselor/ admin meetings with family re: discipline, attendance or academic supports n/a n/a+ n/a 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. School Messenger has a translation service. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Parent Coordinator will address faculty, staff and the PA in the first weeks of school directly in a face to face meeting. Parent Coordinator will work with the PA and the VP of Family Engagement to run a nomination/election process for parent liaisons to begin supporting families with translation/interpretation services by Nov 1. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Translation services and policy will be advertised through parent coordinator/parent liaisons/teachers/class parents, school messenger and PA members (esp the VP of Parent Engagement). Policy states that translation and interpretation by request. We can meet translation needs through Parent Liaisons in Creole, Spanish, Urdu and Bengali. The flier is also posted on the Parent Bulletin Board (in the Main Lobby translated into the dominant languages. Website, Facebook and Mail Chimp will also be utilized to ensure all language groups are included via Google Tranlsate. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent coordinator will solicit feedback directly from parents via focus group and survey. Parent coordinator will also work with Parent Liaisons and PA to gauge level of engagement and the effectiveness of language inclusion strategies in place. Last year the school led workshops in target languages on immigrant rights by collaborating with local CBOs. 8  This year the school is implementing a Parent Liaison role which will boost engagement and communication with speakers of Spanish, Urdu, Bengali and Creole. The new parent coordinator is fluent in Spanish and English, as well. 9 
