 75K140 School Name: P.S. K140 Principal: RODERICK PALTON   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 75K140 K140 330750001340 K-8 141 Macon Street, Brooklyn, NY 11216 (718) 783 4842 Phone Number: (718) 783 4869 Fax: Roderick Palton rpalton@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 75 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Roderick Palton JarrellHill TieshaGroover Maureen Ferrara N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information KetlerLouissaint Superintendent: 400 1 st Avenue, NY, NY KLouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212) 802 1503 Phone Number: (212) 802 1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSCNorth FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Marie Callaghan Executive Director: 400 1st Avenue, NY, NY mcallaghan4@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (212) 802 1520 Phone Number: (212) 802 1688 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Roderick Palton JarrellHill TieshaGroover Marie Barreau Maureen Ferrara Margaret Williams Simone London *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/PA   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) VilmaRuiz AljahiSow TaheshaKelley David AduSarpong Margarita Jimenez Member/PA Member/PA Member/PA Member/ PA Member/ Staff Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At P 140K, we believe that it takes a village to raise a child . We are a community of learners who strive to provide our diverse student population with a quality, rigorous, well-rounded educational experiences. With our students’ abilities at the focus of our instructional methods, we work collaboratively with each other, families, and the community at-large to ensure that our students remember “the village” they come from. By providing them with new options, new opportunities, and accepting no excuses, our students will be ready to meet the challenges of the world while on their path towards college and/or career readiness.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P140K is an elementary/middle school with approximately 340 students from K through grade 8. The school population comprises 67% Black, 26% Hispanic, 2% Asian, 2% American Indian or Alaskan Native, and 1% White. The student body includes 9% English language learners and 100% special education students. Boys account for 84%, up one percent from the previous year. New for this year, we have added an additional site comprising of 12 additional classes of elementary-aged students. On the most recent quality review, the school was rated "Well Developed" in six of the ten rated components,"Proficient" in three areas, and "Developing" in Quality Review indicator 4.1. Our commitment to having high expectations and providing our students with data-driven instruction were highlights of our quality review. As evidenced by student work products, the quality and quantity of student writing pieces improved. Each year, we strive to provide our students with new options, and opportunities. This year, we expanded our participation in the College Access for Middle School students by including more students and making trips to colleges out of state. This past school year we provided our students with more new options and new opportunities. Our shift to model our middle school program to reflect that of a community school was successful. Students transitioned from class to class and teachers taught specific content areas. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Approximately 50% of our student population has a diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder. This is a growing population in our school. As a result, we continue to support the needs of our students in various ways. We continue to implement the principles of Applied Behavioral Analysis during structured teaching methods. Additionally, we have formulated a collaborative team of related service providers and teachers to review the communication needs of all students in grades K-2. This collaboration has increased the presence of communication systems in every classroom. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During the 2017-18 school year, we continued to improve upon providing our students with rigorous instruction. We introduced new curriculum programs with an emphasis on writing, which led to higher quality writing pieces from students across grades. Our students continued to make gains in reading. We also saw huge gains in the elements of Collaborative Teachers and Effective School Leadership. In our school, we strongly believe that "it takes a village to raise a child." Teacher teams met weekly to discuss student work. We also supported our new and early career teachers during professional development sessions on a weekly basis. These sessions were led by lead or highly effective teachers. Our staff also planned and coordinated every culture event, enhancing the learning experience for students, staff and parents. We also held our first "Wellness" Fair which was well attended by families across the city. While we are proud of our gains in most areas of the Framework for Great Schools, we saw a decrease in the area of Supportive Environment, specifically when it came to safety. While incidents leading to serious injury did not increase, there was an increase in physically aggressive behavior, particularly in our K-5 population. Therefore, this area will be an area of focus for our school community. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75K140 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 303 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 89.0% % Attendance Rate 89.1% % Reduced Lunch 9.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.3% 24.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 85.6% 0.0% 99.7% 66.3% 3.0% 4.0% 4 10% 7.2 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1) 2017-18 Fountas and Pinnell data has shown a steady increase. By June 2018, 77% of students had moved at least one reading level, while 56% moved two or more reading levels. In ELA, data shows that in December only 17% of students were able to score a level two constructed response questions. End of year data showed that 53% of students were able to score a level two. In math, the data showed 7% in December and 32% in June; an increase of 25%. With our students who are alternately assessed, 2017-18, our SANDI data showed that the largest movement of students from Level 1 to Level 2 was in the area of Reading for Information 10 (+20%) and Measurement and Data (+14 %). While our students who are assessed using web-ABLLs made modest progress. We noticed that there was a huge correlation between those who did well in the receptive language area to their reading and math progress. 2) Our work needs to continue around building stamina during writing for our students in standardized assessment and to continue to support our students' communication needs in alternate assessment in order to get them ready for other academic areas. In order to increase the rigor for students, our focus will be more on their ability to write extended constructive responses. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% percent increase over baseline of students who are proficient in writing as measured by the appropriate written constructed response rubric for ELA and Math. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Continue the implementation of K-8 literacy curriculum; ReadyGen (K-5) and My Perspective (6-8); including the new writing component. Teachers September 2018 Administer baseline writing assessment. Students September 2018 Develop a team of teachers to develop assessment tools, review data and revise curriculum Teachers October 2018 Teachers will create a monthly professional development plan to implement during the six additional half days. Teachers Support teachers in component 3d of the Framework for teaching Teachers Engage in student Looking at Student Work protocols to identify students in need of additional support with colleagues Teachers Administer mid-year assessment in writing Students October 2018 to May 2019 October 2018- June 2019 October 2017-June2018 January 2019 Review student performance in order to identify trends and further needs. Administrators, Teachers January 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, School-Based Coach, Teachers, Students Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead teachers, Unit Coordinators, Teachers Principal, Assistant principal, Teachers Principal, Assistant principal, School-based Coach, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead teachers, Unit Coordinators, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead teachers, Unit Coordinators, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead teachers, Unit Coordinators, Teachers 3 Administer end of year assessment Students May 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead teachers, Unit Coordinators, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In Fall of 2018, families will be invited to an open house to receive an overview of our instructional program. Our curriculum and pacing will be posted on the website for their review. There will also be additional professional development for parents on how to continue to support learning at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to meet this goal:  Visions for School Improvement funding will be used to cover per diem and per session needs for teachers to engage in training and participation in professional development during regular work hours and after work hours.  Teachers will be programmed for common preps at least twice per week to allow self-directed common planning time.  Each site will have a Unit Teacher through the SBO process to coordinate District-based coaching and to allow administrators to focus more on instructional support to teachers.  CCLS-aligned curriculum will be purchased in core subject areas for all students and teachers.  A school-based coach will be hired for September 2018. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 2.5% percent increase over baseline of students who are proficient in writing as measured by the appropriate writing rubric. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We will use the New York State ELA Test writing rubric to score the on-demand writing sample. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1) Approximately 45% percent of our current student population has been diagnosed with a social emotional disorder. This behaviors are not just limited to students who are diagnosed with emotional disorders, however. We have increased our efforts to train our staff in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention. At least 80% of our staff has been trained, with new training sessions planned for the 2018-19 school year. Preliminary student data shows that there was an overall decrease in aggressive behaviors that led to injury. Level 5 incidents from our K-5 students decreased by 100%. 2) We would like to see a decrease in Level 3 incidents at the greater rate. We believe that our work with staff and students have decreased the intensity of undesirable behaviors, but our school is to teach students long-term coping skills that will keep even the slightest hint of physically aggresive behaviors at bay. 3) As a Positive Behavior Interventions and Supports (PBIS) school, we continue to implement tiered systems of support for our students. Our Pupil Personnel Team (PPT) work with classroom teams to support the needs of referred students. Additionally, we we have partnered with the Office of School Mental Health to support the whole family in meeting the needs of our students. We plan on hosting our Wellness Fair again in 2018-19. We will also continue the implementation of the Sanford Harmony social emotional literacy program and integrate restorative justice practices in select classrooms. We also look forward to launching our new school-wide initiative, We A.R.E. (We are Apologetic, Remorseful/Reflective, Empathetic) to teach our staff and students empathy. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an improvement in student behaviors as evidenced by a 3% decrease in of physically aggressive behaviors as evidenced in the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS). 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Introduce school-wide focus on Empathy (We A.R.E.) Staff Re-train Elementary School staff in using the Sanford and Harmony program Teachers Review OORs and SWIS data to identify students in need of more support with Pupil Personnel Team (monthly). Students Identify new staff for training in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention (ongoing). All staff Continue to train classroom teachers in restorative justice practices (with OSYD) Teachers Provide monthly parent training around various topics relating to students with disabilities. Parents September 2018 September 2018 Administrators Administrators, Crisis Intervention Team October 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, Crisis Intervention Team October 2018-June 2019 October 2018 and January 2019 September 2018-June 2019 TCI Trainers, Administrators OSYD Trainers, Principal Administrators, Parent Coordinator, Parent-Teacher Association Continue Get Ready to Learn (GRTL) in all K-5 classes at K026, K304 and begin implementation at our new site, K005, order to support the social-emotional needs of students with autism. K-5 Students September 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Teachers, Teaching Assistants 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will continue to partner with the Office of Mental Health (OMH) and our staff to provide training to our families. Working with our parent coordinator and our liaison from OMH, there will be monthly workshops for parents around supporting their students social emotional needs on a monthly basis beginning October 2018. A Wellness Fair will occur in December 2018. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 7  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources needed include: Crisis Intervention Teacher (TCI trained), Unit Teachers, paraprofessionals, school aide. Instructional Resources needed include: Sanford and Harmony curriculum. Per diem funding for substitute teachers and paraprofessionals. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, there will be a 2 percent decrease in physically aggressive behaviors amongst our K-5 students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will review student OORS data, as well as School Wide Information Systems (SWIS) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1) We value the growth that our teachers have made throughout the years. Last year, 63% of all teachers ended the school year with an "effective" rating. This current school year, 89% of all teachers earned a rating of "effective", while 11 percent are "developing" in teacher practice. We attribute this increase to several factors:  more opportunities to collaborate through flexible scheduling.  developing content specialist teams in the middle school.    continued professional development for new and early career teachers. continued professional development for all teachers on half days. frequent cycles of observations and feedback. 2) We hope to support teachers in developing consistent practices in their classrooms. According to the 2017-18 Advance system, the teachers who received an overall rating of developing, struggled in components 1e, 3b or 3d. While most teachers have shown improvement in component 3b- Question and discussion techniques, performance in the component 1e and 3d remain inconsistent. This year, we will continue to focus on component 3d- Using Assessment in Instruction in order to increase opportunities to enhance student learning. However, our focus on this area will also tie in with component 1e- Designing coherent instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 3% increase of teachers rated effective or higher in component 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction, of domain three of the Danielson Framework as measured by teacher observations using the Advance system. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Develop a survey to identify areas a need amongst staff around the Framework of Teaching. Teachers Match new teachers with mentor teachers. Teachers Begin new and early career teacher training sessions. Teachers Provide professional development workshops on a monthly basis, during half days or after school. Teachers Observe pedagogical practices of teachers using the Framework for Teaching using pre-determined cycles. Teachers Staff will register for at least two self-selected professional development opportunities outside of school to support their professional growth. Teachers Program teachers to have common preps and planning time in 2016-17 Teachers Schedule six additional half days to support teacher development Teachers, Paraprofessionals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 2018. Administrators, Teachers, Learning Partners Liaison September 2018 Administrators, teachers October 2018- June 2019. School-based coach; lead teachers, Administrators October 2018-June 2019 October 2018; January 2019; May 2019 September 2018- May 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Teachers, District Coach Administrators, Teachers Teachers Administrators, Teachers October 2018- May 2019 Administrators, Teachers, Paraprofessionals How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 0  Families will be invited to a school-wide open house in October 2018 to learn about our curriculum and expectations around collaboration. Families will also be introduced to our staff who will be supporting their children at this time. This will be an opportunity to begin the process of building strong family ties and trust. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources include: School-based and District-based coaching support, School-based coach, Lead teacher in each cohort. Instructional resources include: Professional Learning Manual, Protocols for Looking at Students’ Thinking, CCLS-aligned curriculum. Schedule Adjustments: Additional half-days, Common Preps between cohort members, Additional per diem support using Vision for School Improvement funding.. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, 3% of teachers rated developing will show an improvement in component 3d. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will review the Measure of Teacher Practice Dashboard in the Advance system. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1)The annual compliance report is important to me as a school leader. In most areas of our compliance report that are within our control, we are above 90% or better. Managing our systems for ensuring success in meeting compliance is a goal for us, especially when it comes to writing quality Individual Educational Programs (IEP) and ensuring the timely completion of IEPs. Our team has gotten better at writing quality IEPs, especially the present levels of performance (PLoP) and student goals. We have seen this improvement as a result of increased participating in professional development in IEP writing. Additionally, groups of teachers participated in peer reviews of IEP using the district-wide IEP rubric. 2) Individualized Educational Programs (IEP) are legal documents. A review of compliance data showed that IEPs were finalized by their annual review date only 68% of the time. While this is an increase from last year, our ultimate goal is to have all IEPs finalized by their annual review date. We will continue to monitor and ensure the timely completion of student IEPs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase in the timely completion of annual reviews as measured by the 2018-19 annual School Compliance Report. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Re-post the IEP Coordinator position All Staff June 2018 Principal Develop a system to monitor the IEP process from beginning to end. Unit Teachers/IEP Coordinator September 2017-June 2018 Administrators Provide on-going professional development on the various components of IEP development. Teachers Provide on-site workshops for new and early career teachers on IEP development Teachers October 2018-May2019 IEP Coordinator, Principal, Assistant Principals October 2018 to May 2019 Administrators, Teachers Review IEP tracking system weekly 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Unit Teachers/IEP Coordinator October 2018 to May 2019 Administrators How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to help parents understand the IEP process, a series of monthly workshops will occur to support their understanding of the IEP process, as well as the supports that are in place. Using the Remind application and our school's website, parents will be able to contact me directly, and will be able to contact key members of our school. The workshops will be held at each of our major sites (four out of five) so that the location is convenient and comfortable for them. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Through the SBO process, we created an IEP Coordinator position. This full-time position was designed to oversee the IEP process for all students and to provide support to teachers who may need further assistance. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 3  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, at least 50% of all annual reviews will be completed on time as measured by our IEP tracking tool. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will monitor their progress based on our developed IEP tracking system. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1) P 140K believes that schools and families must have positive relationships in order to best meet the needs of our children. The positive relationship between the school and families has been well documented in the New York City School survey. Over 90% of families feel welcomed at our school. This year, we have increased our family empowerment efforts, by providing more opportunities for them to be present in school, and at times participating in activities collaboratively with their child. These activities included our wellness fairs, mother's and father's day events, carnivals, various shows, and school trips (where appropriate). Survey responses from families were up almost 20%, representing 176 families. 2) While we see an increased presence of families in our school, we would like to see more. Adding a better variety of family programming that focuses on building relationships with staff and students may be the way to achieve this. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 3% increase of overall average parent participation in school-wide events as measured by monthly Parent Coordinator Activities Report. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Connect families to school leaders and staff through school-wide messaging system. Produce a family survey to gauge family interests and availability (posted on our website). Parents; Staff Parents September 2018 Administrators October 2018-November 2018 Principal, Parent Coordinator, PTA Have an open house day for families to visit each learning environment and meet the staff. Parents September/October 2018 Plan a Wellness Fair for families in partnership with the Office of Mental Health. Parents October 2018 Coordinate monthly family meetings and workshops at each site produced by related service providers. Parents September 2018- June 2019 Liaise with community organizations that can educate and provide support to our parent community on a monthly basis. Liaise with related service providers to create a schedule of workshops to support the needs of families and their children. Create opportunities for families to engage in collaborative activities with staff and students. Parents September 2018-June 2019 October 2018- June 2019 Twice per term Parents, students, staff Parents, students, staff Principal, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, PTA Parent Coordinator, Counselors, Office of Mental Health Parent Coordinator, PTA, Related Service Providers Parent Coordinator, PTA, Office of Mental Health. Parents, Parent Coordinator, Administration Staff, Parent Coordinator, Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We partner with the Office of Mental Health, SCO, Counseling and Mediation Center, the Healing Center and QSAC. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 6  Parent Coordinator; Learning Leader Partner (Parent), Translation Funding; Parent Involvement Allocation Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, there will be an average of 5 families per month at school-wide events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will review the PCAR report as well as attendance at each parent meeting. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students reading 2 grades below level (Grades 3-8; Standard) Students scoring 0 points on constructed responses on State Math test Students scoring 0 on constructed response questions on State Math test Students reading 2 grades below level (Grades 3-8; Standard) Students with Behavior Intervention Plans Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) MindPlay; MyOn; Close Reading Strategies; Wilson Multiplication drills; Repeated practice; Dreamboxor ST Math intervention programs; Acletics hands on practice with science teacher; Inspire Science online MyOn; Performance Assessments small group, one-to-one During school, After School small group; one-to-one During school; After-school small group; one-to-one During school; After school small group; one-to-one Duringschool; AfterSchool Second Step/ Sanford Harmony/ Restorative Justice small group; one-to-one During school 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 38 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9 D 75 Schools do not receive Title 1 set aside funding. However, we provide support and assistance through partner CBOs such as SCO. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. District 75 Schools are not Title 1. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). District 75 Schools are not Title 1. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. District 75 Schools are not Title 1. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). District 75 Schools are not Title 1. 1  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). District 75 Schools are not Title 1. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. District 75 Schools are not Title 1. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 3  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 140K, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P140K will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 4  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 5  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 140K , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 6  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 7  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 8  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 9  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 0  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 12 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 1 1 0 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P140K is a Special Education school within the NYC Department of Education's District 75 program. P140K consists of four sites, located throughout Kings County. The school grade ranges from Pre- K to grade 8. There is a total of 310 special needs students, who are supported by approximately 150 staff and three administrators. P140K meets the educational needs of students with physical, cognitive and emotional disabilities. The children diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder, Intellectual Disabilities, and emotional disturbances are serviced as mandated by their IEPs. P.140K's commitment to education is reflected in ongoing professional development and implementation of educational methodologies and strategies. We seek to integrate and transition students into the community schools and generalize applied skills in the home. The Freestanding ENL program of P140K supports curriculum designed to assist English Language Learners in the attainment of English Language Proficiency and academic achievement. The ENL teacher applies both ENL and Special Education methodologies to those students who are mandated as per NYS CR Part 154 to receive ENL services and participate in NYSESLAT testing. Our ENL teacher works collaboratively with content-area teachers across the curriculum to ensure that our ELLs are receiving appropriate language instruction. Our ENL teacher utilizes both the "Integrated" and "Stand-alone" models to provide ENL instruction. To further address the needs of ELL students P.140K proposes to establish a Title III Saturday Instructional Program which will run for eight (8) – five (5) hour sessions. There will be a 12:1:1 group of ELLs, grades 6-8. Based on the NYSESLAT 2018 scores most of our ELLs in grades 6-8 need additional support so they can improve their reading and writing skills. They will be given this opportunity through the Title III program. The 12 ELLs who will be invited to participate in the program are the ones with the most academic needs. The program will run from 9:00 AM to 2:00 PM beginning December 2018 through March 2019. Instruction will be delivered in English using ENL methodologies. Instruction will be provided by the ENL teacher and two bilingual paraprofessionals under supervision of the administrator. The role of the second bilingual paraprofessional is to support our students that speak Bengali. The paraprofessional will support the student in his/her native language. The home languages of the students are Spanish, Arabic, Bengali and Haitian Creole. The focus of the instructional program will be on “Making Healthy Choices”. The students will have the opportunity to learn about the importance of nutrition and 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information fitness as well as explore the world of creating their own dishes while acquiring some basic cooking skills. … childhood is a period where education about healthy eating is essential for establishing healthy eating practices in later years. Schools have been a popular setting for the implementation of health promotion and prevention interventions, as they offer continuous, intensive contact with children and that lifelong health and well being begins with promoting healthy behaviors early in life (Lee A. , 2009). Since all of our Alternate Assessment ELLs at P140K have special needs the “Making Healthy Choices” program will provide additional knowledge and training in order to learn about nutrition and exercising and eventually make the necessary nutritional choices for a healthier body. In addition, ELLs will have the opportunity to develop basic cooking skills which will assist them in the effort to become independent individuals in the future. A variety of hands-on activities, visuals, the use of technology and educational websites, along with a selection of picture books and articles will foster numerous skills and at the same time the use of ENL methodologies will support the language component. Students will have the opportunity to reinforce vocabulary and grammar as well as develop and expand their expressive and academic language within subject areas such as ELA, Science, and Math. Among the materials that will be used are various books, (The Skeleton Inside You by Philip Balestrino, The Edible Pyramid by Loreen Leedy, What Am I Made Of? By David Bennett etc.), as well as various websites ( education.com , kids.usa.gov, healthyeating.org , nourishinteractive.com , artfulparent.com , fns.usda.gov, healthymeals.gov etc.). Read-alouds, text adaptations, and various activities will be used with students to foster understanding along with the use of technology. This year we plan to purchase office supplies, TEAM: Teaching ELLs for Academic Language Mastery which will help ELLs develop grade level academic language and project based books to support the theme of healthy living. ( See Budget) Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The ENL teacher , two paraprofessionals, and one administrator will participate in seven (7) one hour sessions from 8:00 AM to 9:00AM to be held 1 hour prior to each Title III session, beginning December 2018 through March 2019 . Topics will include ENL and Multicultural Literature, Understanding our ELLs' needs, Approaches to ENL instruction, the Role of a Bilingual Paraprofessional, Targeting content Area and ENL Skills, ENL in Special Education, The Importance of Being Independent. Some of the resources which will be used for the professional development are: "Research-Based Methods of Reading Instruction for English Language Learners, Grades K-4" by Sharon Vaughn and Sylvia Linan-Thomson, "Teaching English as a Second Language" by Angela L. Carrasquillo, "The Role of Paraprofessionals in Bilingual Classes" by Maria C. Mazzoni, and "Teaching English Language Learners Across the Content Areas" by Judie Haynes and Debbie Zacarian. Providing this Professional Development will give the participants the tools and skills needed to be effective and to facilitate learning with their students. Our ENL teacher Ms. Ikonomou will be providing the Professional Development 3  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The parent involvement component of the Title III Saturday Program will begin with the Assistant Principal guiding parents in a structured networking activity during which parents will have an opportunity to hear about the program and get to know each other and share their experiences and concerns related to education, communication and the socialization needs of their children. This activity will only be provided during the first session of the program for one hour, from 9:00AM to 10:00AM. Parents will then be invited to join their youngsters throughout the sessions and engage in all the tasks planned by the ENL teacher for each session. Bilingual paraprofessionals will be available to facilitate communication between staff and parents. Parents will receive a Title III letter with information about the program. These letters will be sent to parents in English and their Home Languages. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $9,358.91  Per session  Per diem Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional Development 1 Supervisor will receive 1 hour of per session for each Saturday for 7 weeks at current rate ($63.45 per hour). $63.45 per hour x 7hours = $444.15 1 Teacher will receive 1 hour of per session for each Saturday for 7 weeks at current rate ( $60.65 per hour). $60.65 per hour x 7 hours = $424.55 2 Paraprofessionals will receive 1 hour of per session for each Saturday for 7 weeks at current rate ($34.73 per hour).$34.73 per hour x7 hours x 2 Paraprofessionals = $243.11 x2=$486.22 1 Secretary will receive 7 hours of per session at current rate ($37.37 4  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. per hour). $37.37 per hour x 7 hours = $261.59 Direct Instruction 1 Supervisor will receive 5 hours of per session for each Saturday for 8 weeks at current rate ($63.45 per hour). $63.45 x 5 hours x 8 weeks= $2,538.00 1 Teacher will receive 5 hours of per session for each Saturday for 8 weeks at current rate( $60.65 per hour). $60.65 x 5 hours X8 weeks= $2,426.00 2 Paraprofessionals will receive 5 hours of per session for each Saturday for 8 weeks at current rate ( $34.73 per hour). $34.73 x 5 hours x 8 weeks x 2 paraprofessionals = $ 2,778.40 0 Lexmark Black Ink CS510 Item # -313546223 Price- $47.10 Qty- 2 Total -$94.20 Lexmark Cyan Ink CS510 Item #- 313546215 Price- $48.56 Qty - 2 Total- $97.12 Lexmark Magenta Ink CS510 Item#- 313546231 Price - $48.56 Qty - 2 Total - $97.12 Purchased services  High quality staff 0 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. $2411.44 5  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Lexmark Yellow Ink CS510 Item# - 31354624X Price - $48.56 Qty-2 Total - $ 97.12 Dixie Plates Item # - 316678163 Price - $12.65 Qty -2 total- $ 25.30 GP Pro Dixie cups Item # - 316677337 Price- $4.53 Qty- 3 Total- $13.59 Cutlery Set Item # - 313669651 Price- $15.05 Qty-1 Total - $15.05 Paper Towels Item#- 312681631 Price $ 14.04 Qty- 2 Total- $28.08 Gloves Item# - 315193662 Price$ 29.50 Qty- 1 Total- $29.50 Electric Sharpener Item- 313154341 Price- $40.18 Qty- 1 Total- 40.18 Crayola Broad Line Marker Classpack Item- 312200773 6  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Price- $ 70.56 Qty- 1 Total- $70.56 Crayola Crayons Classroom Pack Item- 313168563 Price- $23.70 Qty- 1 Total- $ 23.70 TEAM: Teaching ELLs for Academic Language Mastery TEAM: Teaching ELLs for Academic Language Mastery: Grades K-2 ( Level AA-B) Item# -902623885 Price- $417.95 Qty- 1 Total- $417.95 TEAM: Teaching ELLs for Academic Language Mastery: Grades 3-5 (Levels C-E) Item#- 90260497X Price - $417.95 Qty- 1 Total- $417.95 TEAM: Teaching ELLs for Academic Language Mastery: Grades 6-8 (Levels F-H) Item# - 902606808 Price- $ 417.95 Qty- 1 Total- $417.95 Staples File Folders Letter Size Item# -081167237 Price- $ 7.69 Qty- 1 Total- $7.69 Staples File Folders Legal Size Item# -081168896 7  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Price- $ 9.23 Qty- 1 Total- $9.23 Project based Learning Healthy Eating Grades 3-5 Item# -289375371 Price- $ 59.22 Qty- 1 Total- $59.22 Learning Resources magnetic healthy Foods Mat Item# -313090424 Price- $ 22.74 Qty- 2 Total- $45.48 Learning Resources Healthy Helpings My Plate Game Item# -313091544 Price- $ 12.99 Qty- 1 Total- $12.99 Dry Erase Markers Item# -315793716 Price- $ 3.31 Qty- 5 Total- $16.55 Clipboards Item# -316667099 Price- $ .79 Qty- 3 Total- $2.37 Yellow Pencils #2 Item# -316904929 Price- $1.13 Qty- 5 Total- $5.65 Sheet Protectors Item# -316916269 8  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Price- $ 11.33 Qty- 1 Total- $11.33 Writing pads Item# -31692332X Price- $ 8.29 Qty- 1 Total- $8.29 Two Pocket Folders Item# -317314335 Price- $ 47.27 Qty- 1 Total- $47.27 Food Items for Healthy Eating Price- $300.00 0 100 Metrocards @$5.50 per card ( Round Trip) = $550.00 Refreshment for parents : $45.65 $12,366.00 Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0 $550.00 $45.65 $12,366.00 9  0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name P140K Borough Brooklyn School Number 140 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Roderick Palton Coach NA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Georgia Ikonomou Teacher/Subject Area NA Teacher/Subject Area NA Related-Service Provider Kerry Owens Superintendent Ketler Louissaint Assistant Principal Vivian Smith Coach NA School Counselor Robert Martini Parent Carol Ann Gould Parent Coordinator Nevidita Biswas Field Support Center Staff Member NA Other (Name and Title) Cynthia Tucker / Testing Coord C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program N/A Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 312 1 Total number of ELLs 28 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.97%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.140K uses a variety of assessments to assess the early literacy skills for ELLs. Fountas and Pinnell, SANDI/FAST and WEBABLLS ( for our alternate assessment students) and teacher-created assessments are used to provide data on the students skill levels. This data helps to inform the school's instructional plan by indicating the students' strengths and weaknesses in the areas of decoding, comprehension and fluency. The data has shown that the ELLs' comprehension, decoding and vocabulary levels are not up to their grade levels due to their learning disabilities and second language proficiency needs. This information is then used by the teachers to drive instruction and set individual goals for the students. 2  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The structures that are in place to support this effort are professional developments offered by District 75 to assist staff in analyzing and dissecting the data to identify trends and patterns to improve student outcomes. The teachers have attended professional developments surrounding the administration of Fountas and Pinnell, SANDI/FAST and WebABLLs. The teachers then use the data to drive their instruction around setting goals for each student in their class. Built into teacher schedules, are common meetings times where they review the data, plan lessons and create objectives based on the results of the mentioned assessments given to the students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The summative assessments used by the school are: NYC Performance Tasks and SANDI/ FAST ( for alternate assessment students) to measure baseline, progress and areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The structures that are in place to address interventions based on the summative data is monthly professional development and weekly common planning time during CTTM meetings. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] P140K reviews the assessment data and bases instruction for ELLs within the RtI framework. Based on the assessment scores and analysis of the results, the teachers decide on the type of intervention necessary based on the areas of deficit. Tier 1 interventions focus on promoting language and literacy development across the curriculum, fostering competencies in reading, writing, listening and speaking. Data is analysed and used to design instructional routines for small group (Tier 2) and individual (Tier 3) interventions. Differentiation and material adaptations are ways of meeting the needs of our academically and emotionally challenged ELLs. Along with the data gathered from the summative assessments, other ELLs' needs are taken into consideration: number of years the student has received ENL instruction, English and home language literacy for short-term and long-term ELL students and SIFE needs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. P140K uses data from the NYSESLAT to inform our ELL program. Standardized Assessment ELLs' data are derived from the ELA and Math State assessments, while Alternate Assessment ELL's data are derived from NYSAA. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? ATS reports are printed and distributed to ENL, classroom and subject area teachers to review during common meetings times. Adjustments to the program are discussed and proposed to meet the needs of the students and increase outcomes. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 3  Since P140K is a District 75 school all decisions regarding the services provided to the students are based on the mandates indicated by CSE in conjunction with the parents. ENL classes are mostly 12:1:1 and always in alignment with the mandates stated on the IEPs. Instruction is delivered through Stand Alone and Integrated. The ELLs are grouped into homogeneous classes based on their grade level and level of language proficiency. Each ENL class consists of ELLs ranged within three grade levels. Both programs include 50 minute periods of instruction. During Pull-Out, the ENL teacher delivers the Stand-alone instruction to develop English language skills so that the students can succeed in core content courses. During Push-In, the ENL teacher delivers Integrated instruction to build English language skills through content area instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In P140K the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided as per CR Part 154-2. ELLs at the entering and emerging levels receive 180 minutes of Stand-alone ENL and 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA. At the transitioning level, Ells receive a total number of 180 minutes with a minimum number of 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. At the expanding level, Ells receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. Finally, Ells at the commanding level receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. There is a common preparation time between the ENL teacher and the classroom teachers and collaborative lesson planning. The ENL teacher plans carefully to ensure curricular alignment. Due to the staffing constraints, ELL students receive the maximum of instructional minutes possible. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Students at P140K acquire the English language through intense instruction which focuses on all content areas. The ENL lessons designed are rigorous, focus on all subject areas and target content specific academic vocabulary. The language of instruction is English. In order to support the needs of our ELLs, the NYS certified ENL teacher follows the New York State ENL Standards aligned with the Common Core Standards and incorporates ENL strategies such as the Cognitive Academic Language Approach (CALLA), Total Physical Response (TPR), Language Experience Approach (LEA), Whole Language Approach, graphic organizers and multi-sensory approaches used in conjunction with augmentative communication devises and Meyer Johnson picture symbols. The ENL teacher also uses technology (computer and computer software) to provide students with additional instructional support (e.g. brainpopesl.com, edhelper.com, eslprintables.com, kizclub.com, and others. To enhance the ELLs’ performance in the ENL class, small group instruction and scaffolding techniques are used for targeting ENL skills and content area skills in order for the students to meet their short-term objectives and long-term goals. Content area support is provided through the integrated model of instruction which is a co-teaching method. The ENL teacher and the classroom teacher provide instruction to ELL students in the areas of ELA, Math and Science. Planning and preparation for each lesson is done through common planning times. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The ELLs are evaluated in their native languages through the support from Alternate Placement paraprofessionals who speak the students' native language and English, and the Bilingual psychologist. 4  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction for SIFE students focuses on developing literacy skills. Although ENL classes are homogenous based on the students’ mandated ratios, SIFE students are included in the beginning proficiency level. Differentiated instruction ensures student participation and therefore progress. Alternate placement paraprofessionals are provided for students whose IEP mandate is bilingual instruction, but for whom no bilingual placement is available. ENL instruction for Newcomers focuses on developing language skills and provides support to help ELLs integrate into the new environment and culture. Media centers for listening and viewing educational video-clips, cultural awareness through the arts and interactive practice and games are some ways of assisting the newcomers. ELLs receiving more than 4 years of service are provided with language support and preparation for the state assessments. However, most of our ELLs, are required to take Alternate Assessments (NYSAA), due to their disabilities. Long-term ELLs receive additional RTI support besides the mandated instructional minutes that they receive. After school programs, assistive communication devices, alternate placement paraprofessionals as well as Academic Intervention Programs are some ways of supporting the long-term ELLs. Although currently there are no former ELLs at P140K, support would be provided based on the State mandates. Title III programs as well as after school programs would be available to former ELLs. Former ELLs will receive 90 minutes of ENL services for 2 years after exiting ELL status. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Since P140K serves students with special needs, ENL instruction is differentiated to meet these needs. Strategies such as Total Physical Response (TPR), Language Experience Approach (LEA)as well as multi-sensory approaches are used. Apart from technology, use of smart boards and interactive software, ENL instruction is delivered through the use of a variety of materials to meet the students’ needs. On Our Way to English, Reading A to Z and BrainPop are programs that provide materials content specific in ELA, Science, Math and Social Studies always aligned to the Common Core Standards. This way students have access to academic content areas. In addition, the ENL lessons are designed according to the Bilingual progressions and focus on Linguistic objectives which help students accelerate their English development. Augmentative Alternative Communication (AAC) devices, which provide visual supports, encourage interaction and increase motivation. Meyer Johnson picture symbols promote communication, which lead to learning. Age and grade level appropriate materials, in conjunction with materials specifically adapted to meet the ELLs’ special needs, ensure progress in their language learning process. Those ELLs whose IEPs mandate bilingual instruction receive Freestanding ENL with the addition of Alternate Placement paraprofessionals who speak the students' native language and English. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? P140K a District 75 Program serves the needs of Special Education Students with autism, intellectual disabilities and emotional disturbance. Technology is systematically used throughout instruction to ensure student participation and increase student motivation. Instruction and curriculum are based on the needs, including language acquisition, of the individual student's IEP goals. Native language support is provided by the presence of bilingual paraprofessionals who offer individual assistance. In addition, differentiated instruction ensures IEP goals and English proficiency achievement are met. Lunch, assemblies, shared gym space and Inclusion programs are ways in which the school ensures that our students are spending time with their non-disabled peers. 5  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. P.140K offers several intervention programs for ELLs in ELA. Failure Free and Mind Play are ELA intervention programs targeting Newcomer ELLs, as well as. Developing and Long -term ELLs. Dream Box and ST Math are currently being used to support students in Mathematics, targeting developing and long-term ELLs. Reading Mastery is a K-2 reading intervention program. All reading intervention programs gear towards students with reading levels below their grade levels. The language in which they are offered is English. Native Language support is offered to students whose IEP mandate is bilingual instruction, but for whom the school does not currently have such placement possibilities. For the students in Alternate Assessment, the teachers are using SMILE as the intervention targeting all subgroups.. P.140K has a teacher that is Wilson trained and works with the students on improving their decoding and fluency skills. This intervention targets mostly SIFE students. Teachers are required during their professional periods to do one-on-one sessions to provide support in the areas of Math, Social Studies and Science. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year, Reading Mastery for grades K-5 will be considered. This Intervention Program will target reading for alternate assessment students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? P140K never had a bilingual program. The school never had the required number of bilingual student necessary to open a bilingual class. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. At P140K all students have access to every available program. Apart from the Intervention Programs , ELLs participate in PBIS, as well as, clubs and the after school programs which provide physical education services. ELLs that accumulate PBIS points have the opportunity to participate in educational clubs (technology, movies, games, work study) that are offered every Friday during school hours. All ELLs participate in the Intervention Programs because it is part of their weekly instructional plan. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. P140K uses Attainment for ELA and Math for our elementary and middle school students in alternate assessment in grades K-8. GO Math is used with our standardized students in grades K-8. For ELA, Ready Gen is used with the standardized students in grades K- 5 and My Perspective for students in grades 6-8, and On Our Way to English is used along with a variety of educational websites, which provide additional materials to support ELLs, such as eslprintables.com, kizclub.com, brainpopesl.com as well as various apps. In addition, Bilingual Glossaries and Dictionaries are used for native language support. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? At P140K utilizes informal assessments to determine the level of support needed in the student's native language. Support is delivered through the use of native language resources, (eg. bilingual dictionaries, literature in the student's native language) as well as, the presence and use of bilingual paraprofessionals who speak the students' native language and English. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. P140K uses a variety of resources to support ELLs in all subject areas. Freestanding ENL instruction is not only driven based on the data collected, but also on the curriculum developed for each grade level. Therefore, the resources used are carefully 6  selected and always age and grade-level appropriate. Text adaptations are very often performed in order to meet the special needs of our students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? P140K is a co-location school. We share the gym, auditorium, cafeteria and outside recess area. Time is scheduled to ensure that P140 students and ELLs have use of these shared facilities. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At P140K, newly enrolled ELL students are offered orientation sessions both before the beginning of the school year and during the school year. In addition, the summer school program offered entitled Chapter 683 provides new ELLs a great opportunity to integrate within the school environment. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At present, P140K does not offer any language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Currently, P140K only features Freestanding ENL program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers at P140K are required to attend a minimum of 2 professional development courses a year. District 75 offers professional development courses which focus on the needs of the ELLs and their disabilities. All teachers of ELLs are strongly encouraged to participate in the Jose P. training programs offered throughout the year. There are frequent reminders of the dates for the 10 hour program. The professional development plan for teachers is they have to attend a minimum of 2 professional developments for the school year and reciprocal teach the information to their colleagues at their CTTM's or common planning times. In house professional development focuses on developing rigorous lessons and instruction aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards using the UDL framework in order to meet the students' individual needs. The topics of the academic year for P140K professional development will be determined based on the existing needs of the staff. All teachers register to attend professional developments that are aligned to the curriculum/ programs used to instruct the students. All curriculum used are aligned to the common core. To address the needs of the English language learners, teachers will complete a minimum of 15% of the required professional development hours dedicated to language acquisition, co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction of ELLs. The ENL teacher will have a minimum of 50% of the required professional development hours dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction. Some of the professional development courses by NYS/NYC Regional Bilingual Education Resource Network include : "Literacy Institute, Going Deeper with Academic Discourse . The Power of Conversational Skills in the ENL Classroom", "Developing an IEP for an ELL", "Differentiating Instruction for ELLs with Special Needs", "Discovering Root Causes of Academic 7  Challenges of ELLs with Special Needs". Some additional courses by NYC/D75 Office of the ELLs include: "The Multicultural and Multilingual Classroom", "Incorporating the Language Experience Approach into Science Instruction for ELLs with Disabilities"' , "Designing Effective Classroom Assessments for ELLs with Disabilities". 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. At P140K, 15% of the required professional development provided to all teachers will be ELL-specified. Co-teaching best practices and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs will be some of the topics. I The ENL teacher will conduct professional development to all teachers to address the needs of the ELLs. In addition, the ENL teacher will receive a minimum of 50% of the required professional development in ELL-specific topics.Some of the professional development courses by NYS/NYC Regional Bilingual Education Resource Network include : "Literacy Institute, Going Deeper with Academic Discourse . The Power of Conversational Skills in the ENL Classroom", "Developing an IEP for an ELL", "Differentiating Instruction for ELLs with Special Needs", "Discovering Root Causes of Academic Challenges of ELLs with Special Needs". Some additional courses by NYC/D75 Office of the ELLs include: "The Multicultural and Multilingual Classroom", "Incorporating the Language Experience Approach into Science Instruction for ELLs with Disabilities"' , "Designing Effective Classroom Assessments for ELLs with Disabilities". Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to parent-teacher conferences and initial parent orientation, P140K will provide annual individual meetings with the parents or guardians of ELLs once a year with the ENL teacher to discuss the ELL's language development progress, English language proficiency assessment results and language development needs. Interpreting/ translating services will be provided according to the parents' needs. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. At P140K, the role of the parent coordinator is very important. It involves parent outreach, workshops and providing resources to the families depending upon their needs such as home attendants. Some title of workshops are : What is an IEP? Why are Related Services important? Family engagement is also provided through special events such as weekend fairs, holiday celebrations, and movies. P140K offers special orientation sessions at the beginning of the school year where parents are informed of the various activities scheduled for the year. During Meet and Greet, parents of ELLs visit classrooms during instructional periods and spend time observing their children participating in activities during the lessons. For the parents of ELLs, there are interpreters who provide translating services. Parent meetings, parent-teacher conferences, as well as assemblies are some of the activities. In addition, P140K offers parents a variety of workshops on every year in order to inform them of aspects of their children's education and requirements. Some of the subjects include IEPs, related services, busing etc. . In addition, parents of ELLs are encouraged to participate in the Parent Academy for Parents of ELLs: The Road to College and Career Readiness, as well as D75 led workshop for all parents including parents of ELLs . Some of the topics include: Cyberbullying, Needs,-wants-wishes and dreams, Guardianship. 8  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. P140K is a District 75 school. For students in District 75, placement is determined at CSE in conjunction with parents. 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Roderick Palton, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.140K School DBN: 75K140 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Roderick Palton Title Principal Vivian Smith Assistant Principal Nevidita Biswas Parent Coordinator Georgia Ikonomou ENL/Bilingual Teacher Carol Ann Gould Parent NA NA NA NA Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Robert Martini School Counselor Ketler Louissaint NA Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member NA Cynthia Tucker Other Testing Coordinator Kerry Owens Other Speech Therapist NA Other NA Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 NA NA NA NA 10/20/17 10/20/17 NA 10/20/17 10/20/17 NA 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75K140 School Name: P140 Superintendent: K.Louissaint The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Nevidita Biswas Parent Coordinator No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P140K determines its language translation and interpretation needs by using the data gathered when parents complete the Home Language Identification Survey, every time a new student is enrolled in the public school system for the first time or when a student has been away from the NYS/NYC public school system for two or more consecutive years. Additional data is gathered by the ATS reports using the home language information. Emergency cards are also used to gather information about preferred languages spoken at home. Direct contact with the parents and legal guardians through an interview, help provide evaluation and assessment of the school-language needs. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Bengali Arabic Haitian Creole 319 25 5 1 1 90.88 7.12 1.42 0.28 0.28 318 25 4 1 3 90.6 7.12 1.14 0.28 0.85 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. NA Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Yearly Calendar; Related Service Introduction Letter; September; September; Monthly Operational Correspondance; Monthly; Monthly Newsletters; After-school programs: Monthly; November; Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. District 75 Translation Unit, Bilingual Staff, Google Translate List of the Family's preferred language of communication is considered when reviewing the calendar of operational documents that need to be distributed so correspondence can be translated by the dissemination deadline. District 75 Translation Unit, Bilingual Staff, Google Translate List of the Family's preferred language of communication is considered when reviewing the calendar of operational documents that need to be distributed so correspondence can be translated by the dissemination deadline. 3  Title III Program: January; Parent/Teacher Conferences; November & March; NYS Testing April & May; District 75 Translation Unit, Bilingual Staff, Google Translate List of the Family's preferred language of communication is considered when reviewing the calendar of operational documents that need to be distributed so correspondence can be translated by the dissemination deadline. District 75 Translation Unit, Bilingual Staff, Google Translate List of the Family's preferred language of communication is considered when reviewing the calendar of operational documents that need to be distributed so correspondence can be translated by the dissemination deadline. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Parent/Teacher Meet-N-Greet, Parent/Teacher Conferences, IEP conferences, September' provide interpretation service(s)? In-school interpretation by bilingual Staff and DOE Translation and interpretation Unit November & March As needed Monthly Monthly parent meetings conducted by the parent coordinator, Special events (holiday performances, spring performances and graduation). December May & June As needed Counselors, school psychologists, speech providers, occupational and physical therapists communicate with parents In-school interpretation by bilingual Staff and DOE Translation and interpretation Unit In-school interpretation by bilingual Staff and DOE Translation and interpretation Unit In-school interpretation by bilingual Staff and DOE Translation and interpretation Unit 4  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency the school uses bilingual Staff and the DOE Translation and Interpretation Service to reach limited-English-proficient families. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. P140 Weekly communication to staff references Chancellor's Regulation A-663 and Parent Coordinator turn keys information provided in her training facilitated by the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) P.140K will fulfill Section VI of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 by posting signage of covered languages and availability of interpretation services and provide a translated copy to limited-English Proficient parents of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? P.140K utilizes the parent survey for feedback and effectiveness of communicating with parents in their native language. Information gleaned from the survey is reviewed and improvements are made: memos to staff are disseminated reminding them to utilize the Translation and Interpretation Unit. 5 
