 14K157 School Name: P.S. 157 BENJAMIN FRANKLIN Principal: KOURTNEY BOYD   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: 331400010157 Pre-K -8 850 Kent Avenue 718-622-9285 Section 1: School Information Page School Information Benjamin Franklin Magnet School for Civic Leadership in Health and Science School Number (DBN): 14K157 718-398-4155 Fax: Phone Number: KourtneyBoyd kboyd@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: KourtneyBoyd Wanda Salerno Evelyn Morales Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): N/A N/A N/A CBO Representative: Jennifer O'Brian District Information Geographical District: 14 Superintendent’s Office Address: Alicja Winnicki Superintendent: 216 Heyward Street Brooklyn New York 11206 Awinnic@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-302-7600 Phone Number: 718-302-7978 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: 4 Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street Brooklyn New York 11201 Room 501 Executive Director’s Office Address: BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3107 Phone Number: 718-935-2587 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) KourtneyBoyd Wanda Salerno Evelyn Morales N/A N/A Jennifer O'Brian *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Parent/PTA Secretary Parent Parent/PTA Co-President   N/A N/A N/A N/A Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Teacher/SLT Secretary Teacher/Co-Chairperson Teacher/Co-Chairperson Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At the the Benjamin Franklin Magnet School we work in collaboration and share the collective responsibility to develop a safe, caring and respectful learning environment where all community members--scholars, faculty, staff and caregivers--are held to high expectations. We encourage leadership through challenge, critical thinking and active engagement to empower scholars to effect positive change in their lives and the lives of others.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Vision: The Franklin Magnet School is a vital center of community life enriched by the diversity of our city and welcoming to all families. Each classroom offers engaging and culturally-relevant curriculum that builds on scholars’ interests and abilities. Scholar needs, as identified by regular assessment, inform our teaching and guide appropriate and effective intervention services. We offer an enriching learning environment and a comprehensive system of supports to address the needs of the whole child. Franklin Magnet Scholars are curious and creative learners who succeed through personal initiative and sustained effort to reach high academic goals. They are critical thinkers who seek knowledge and possess technological competence and collaborative skills. Our scholars embrace diversity, act responsibly, and contribute to our community. Franklin Magnet Educators believe that all scholars can meet or exceed rigorous academic standards. Educators, staff, and school leadership together form a rich professional learning community where all are supported to hone our professional craft and improve our effectiveness. Through the examination of our instructional practices and data, we adjust our teaching and operational systems in order to continuously improve. We are responsible in the stewardship of our fiscal resources and fair and equitable in their distribution. Franklin Magnet Caregivers and Community are integral to the success of our scholars and school. Caregeivers are active, engaged and welcomed partners who give valued input and participate in making important decisions about our academic and enrichment programs. Our diverse community is passionate about equitable educational outcomes for all scholars. Our civic and community organizations partner with us to promote family engagement and the well-being and success of our scholars. Mission: At the Franklin Magnet School we work in collaboration and share the collective responsibility to develop a safe, caring and respectful learning environment where all community members—scholars, faculty, staff and caregivers—are held to high expectations. We encourage leadership through challenge, critical thinking and active engagement to empower scholars to effect change in their lives and the lives of others. Our Beliefs: 1. We believe in the unlimited potential of each scholar. 2. We believe in building capacity in leadership amongst our staff. 3. We believe in the value of collaboration and communication among faculty. 4. We believe that commitment to and implementation of continuous learning leads to improved scholar performance. 5. We believe in collecting, analyzing, and sharing data to guide decisions that improve scholar learning; individualize instruction and promote social, emotional, and physical development. 0  6. We believe in the power of personal connections and relations amongst staff, scholars, and caregivers. 7. We believe in relevant job embedded professional development, effective supervision and evaluation practices. Theory of Action In our work, these beliefs represent our school theory of action. If we use a school based Improvement Process that engages each school leader and educator in a collaborative cycle of inquiry—goal setting, action planning and refinement—then we will build the capacity of our leaders and teachers to achieve targeted areas of improvement and develop coherence between district level continuous improvement planning and school based improvement planning. If we cultivate collaborative communities of practice that foster input from school leadership and classroom educators on issues related to instructional practice and scholar achievement, then we will create a shared vision and purpose for our work leading to more effective practice and higher levels of scholar learning. If we identify the knowledge and skills needed for scholars to be college and career ready in the 21st century and develop a guaranteed, standards-based curriculum, then there will be clarity, consistency and equity to what all scholars will learn and be able to do and what all educators teach. If we provide ongoing, high quality, relevant, professional learning based on identified scholar and educator needs, then educators will utilize their new knowledge and scholar learning will improve. If supervision and evaluation practices are designed to identify and give specific feedback to educators about their use of high quality instructional techniques and their delivery of the curriculum and professional practice, then the overall quality of teaching will improve and scholar learning will increase. We host several annual celebrations that have become tradition at PS/IS 157: ● At our annual Welcome Back Multicultural Festival, we celebrate the many diverse cultures that exist within our school community through song, dance, ethnic food and many fun-filled activities. ● For our Thanksgiving Feast, caregivers generously prepare and donate food to provide a Thanksgiving Luncheon for our school community to enjoy together. ● For the December Holiday season, Santa Claus visits our school with gifts for each of our younger students; and, we conduct a Holiday Show where each of our classes perform festive songs and dances. ● Our Black History Month Assembly celebrates our African-American heroes through recitals, songs and dance performances conducted by our students. 1  ● Our annual Poetry Assembly in April showcases our students’ oral and writing talents by having them recite famous poems and/or write and present their own poems in an assembly setting. ● Career Day provides an opportunity for our students to explore a variety of career choices. A variety of professionals are invited to our school to speak to our students about different career choices. On this day, all students are able to find our more information about a career that may be of interest to them, through question and answer sessions. ● A Cinco De Mayo Festival takes place every May and celebrates the Mexican culture with traditional Mexican food, music and dance for the enjoyment of our entire school community. ● National Running Day supports our commitment as a Wellness School to promote good health. On this day, our students Pre K - 8 and their teachers assemble outside the school building and jog around the park. Our senior students lead our youngest students. ● In June, two traditional events take place at Taaffe Park, located directly across the street from our school building. At our annual Dance Festival, each class performs a dance choreographed to a song of their choice. All students, parents and school staff are invited to this fun-filled afternoon to enjoy the music and dance, along with snacks and drinks. We also conduct a Staff vs. Students Basketball Game in June, where our Middle School students compete against teachers and other staff members in a friendly, but competitive, basketball game. Parents, students and school staff are all invited to attend. ● Movie Night takes place once a month on a Friday evening and provides our school community an opportunity to spend affordable quality family time together by viewing a popular movie in our auditorium complete with popcorn, hot dogs and other movie snacks, all at a discounted price. We have established a wonderful relationship with many Community Based Organizations (CBO’s) such as: ● OST- Grand Street Settlement and Citizen Schools – which houses a free after school program for students in Kindergarten to Grade 8 ● Midori & Friends - After School Music Program where students study drums and violins ● Swim For Life - Students go to the Metropolitan pool to learn how to swim in Second Grade ● Cycle Kids – Students learn about riding bicycles safely ● Relay for Life – American Cancer Association ● Puerto Rican Family Institute – Support for struggling families and children City Tech Pre College Program Magnet Grant Partnerships: The Beam Center Brooklyn Botanic Gardens The Prospect Park Zoo 2  Myrtle Village Green Pugh Productions FDNY L-119/E- 211 At our school we take pride in building a culture where everyone works collaboratively to support our scholars. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We offer all students academic and enrichment opportunities. We have on site a Physical and Occupational Therapist, two Speech Pathologists and Guidance Counselor to service the supplementary needs of all our students. Our nurturing approach to learning encompasses all of our students; specifically, for our English Language Learners, we have two full-time ESL Teachers to service the needs of our K-8 students and teachers. Through the Bravo Grant we will be implementing A Dual Language Program starting in kindergarten. We will initiate the Leader in Me Grant in September. The entire school community will be trained in leadership. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The area, in which our school has made the most growth during the previous year, is in Supportive Environment and Strong Family Ties according to the NYC School Survey 2015 - 2016 Report. Our school has also made growth in student progress; specifically in English Language Arts with our bottom third population. Based on data analysis (specifically, the end of the year MOSL results, the NYS Assessments in Literacy NYSESLAT), it is evident that our focus needs to be in writing in all grades across content areas supporting Rigorous Instruction. This practice is also noted in the 2015 - 2016 Quality Review, we will focus on having all learners fully exercise and apply critical and analytical thinking and high levels of involvement in discussions. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 14K157 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 479 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 77 76 17 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 47 45 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 87.0% % Attendance Rate 86.0% % Reduced Lunch 17.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 78.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.57 0% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 24.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 77% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 24 24 90.3% 0.0% 27.3% 18.2% 0.4% 0.8% 2 5% 10 19.7% 38% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A YSH NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. An analysis of our historical data in English Language Arts State Test, students performed below 60% in craft structure and integration of Knowledge and key ideas and details. In the NYS Math Test, students performance poorly in Number and Operations/ Fractions with a drop of 15%. The Quality Review Report for 2014 -2015 in the area of Rigorous Instruction specified a rating of proficient (1.1, 1.2, 2.2) indicating a need to continue with the implementation of rigorous curricula, therefore, in addition to the CCLS the school uses programs that are aligned to the CCLS. Specifically we are using: - Journeys (Grades K-5) and My Perspective (Grades 6-8) for Literacy and will be joining Teacher's College 100 School's Writing Project in grades K-8 - Go Math (Grades K--8) for Mathematics and will participate in Cohort II of the Algebra for All initiative - For Science teachers follow the Scope and Sequence and will participate in Urban Advantage in both elementary and middlegrades - Teachers utilize the New Social Studies Program Passport for Grades K-8. 2. An analysis of the school’s strengths and needs suggest that in order to provide Rigorous instruction teachers must use student data when creating daily lessons and units as evidence in their tracking unit test recorded under Data next steps. (Quality Review 2.2 Assessments). In addition, according to our supporting evidence from the Quality Review (1.1) indicates that lesson and unit plans across the grades and subjects plan numerous scaffolds and entry point for all students. Additional support include the following; - Rubrics In All Content Areas - Opportunities For Students Led Conversations - Higher Order Thinking Questions (DOK) - Scaffolding for SWD and ELLs 5  - Think Aloud - Annotations - Front loading essential vocabulary - Reciprocal Teaching - Multiple Entry Points - Interdisciplinary and Thematic Projects - Peer and Self Assessment Rubrics Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, scholars ability to explain their mathematical thinking will increase by a minimum 5% increase in scholar proficiency on the NYS math exam. By June 2019, ability to read informational texts will increase by a minimum 5% proficiency on the NYS ELA exam. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Research based instructional programs are in place to support a learning environment: Instructional Leaders and Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Instructional leaders, and teachers  Journeys ; ELA K-5, My Perspectives; ELA K-8,  Math K-5, Go Math, Engage NYC:6-8.  Cycles of observation, Learning Walks along with weekly teacher team meetings.  Periodic Data Analysis  On-going professional Development from Literacy Coach/ Math Experts, other constituents that support school goals, and inter- visitations paying particular attention to the instructional focus around feedback. Student Centered Learning Practices that include cooperative learning, relating learning to real life situations and application of real life word problems.   Opportunities for students to assess their own learning and receive feedback based on rubrics and other resources that support learning.  Collaboration in in planning between ENL and Special Ed teachers 7   Teachers will employ effective strategies with ENL, and students with disabilities, such as drawing on their prior knowledge; providing opportunities to review previously learned concepts and teaching them to employ those concepts; organizing themes or strands that connect the curriculum across subject areas; and providing individual guidance, assistance, and support to fill gaps in background knowledge.  Unit Projects and Trips 2. Through multiple entry points and UDL approach teachers ensure that the needs of all students are met. Across classrooms, teaching practices are aligned to the curricula and reflect an articulated set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the Danielson Framework for Teaching and the Instructional ELA/ Math Shifts. 3. Parents will have the opportunity to take part in a variety of Instructional Leaders and Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Instructional leaders, and teachers Instructional Leaders and Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Instructional Leaders and Teachers workshops where they will obtain information on how to work alongside our school to support their child at home. In addition, Parents of all students parents will be kept informed about this goal through attendance at School Leadership Team Meetings, Parents’ Association Meetings, Parents outreach on Tuesdays and Tea with the Principal. Also, the parent coordinator will set up meetings for parents and teachers that address concerns that the parent may have. The element of trust is address within the following Groups: ● School Leadership Team Meetings ● UFT Consultation Meeting Instructional Leaders and Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Instructional Leaders and Teachers 8 ● Parent Teacher Association ● Student Ambassadors 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the 2018-2019 school year, families will have the opportunity to take part in a variety of workshops where they will obtain information on how to work alongside our school to support their child at home. In addition, parents will be kept informed about this goal through attendance at School Leadership Team Meetings, Parents’ Association Meetings, Parents outreach on Tuesdays and Tea with the Principal. Also, the parent coordinator will set up meetings for parents and teachers that address concerns that the parent may have. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order for rigorous instruction to take place, there must be regularly scheduled meetings for grade meetings during the school day, after school opportunity such as the Vertical Inquiry Team and SIT meetings. We will need to use the resources of Schoolnet, MSQI, Reciprocal Teaching along with the Core Curricula that are aligned to the CCLS. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will use and analyse the data from the Mid- Point Benchmark , Running Records and Assessments aligned with our Curricular Programs/ CCLS from Schoolnet through out the school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teachers will utilize assessments from the Core Programs (Journeys, My Perspectives, Engage NY, Go Math) This includes NYC periodic assessments in ELA and Mathematics. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the results of our school’s Learning Environment Survey, our school academic programs reflects the following:  There is an overall satisfaction of 83% of the Instructional Core at our school as opposed to the city’s rate of 81% satisfaction, the satisfaction rate for systems of improvement for PS IS 157 is at 91% compared to the city’s rate of 86% and the overall satisfaction rate for the culture of the school is 93% compared to 81% for the city  According to these findings, our Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools Report, in order to continue and promote a Supportive Environment where the students feel safe and supportive; to promote learning aligned to the CCLS and College and Career Readiness in students including establishing supportive relationships with teachers and other adults; we will put into place, additional incentives and student recognition awards.  Relative to the Capacity Framework, our school strength includes lesson plans that focus on student’s initiation of inquiry through questions and discussion supported by a variety of different strategies. Some practices include but are not limited to: Reciprocal Learning, Literature Circles (middle school) and Math discourse.  These strategies will continue to support an environment where learning is valued by students, parents and educators. A behavior plan created by the students, teachers and guidance counselors has also been established, revised and modified to support a nurturing and positive school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, middle school scholar expectations will be shared, and scholar voice will increase, through the implementation of monthly Town Hall meetings. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● We will continue to set high expectations for all children to educate the “whole” child; continue and celebrate cultural and linguistic diversity; communicating and involving caregivers and establishing added attention to health and safety. Instructional Leaders , Teachers, Parents and all students We will have the following in place: September 2018 to June 2019 Instructional Leaders , Teachers, Service Providers     Leader in Me Grant: Training and a coach will support the school community Student Ambassadors: collaborate, lead and support implementing decisions Learning Walks Interdisciplinary Projects Through multiple entry points and UDL teachers ensure that the needs of all students are met. A transition plan for all students over the age of 12 has also been established; e.g., Instructional Leaders , Teachers, Parents and all students September 2018 to June 2019 Instructional Leaders , Teachers, Service Providers vocational assessments completed by students, teachers and caregivers. IEP’s include the input of the students and of the caregivers. Guidance and advisement is in place to support the needs of all our students including SIFE and shelter students . The School Implementation Team will continue to meet twice a week to monitor student progress and make sure that students needs are met. Caregivers will have the opportunity to take part in a variety of workshops where they will obtain information on how to work alongside our school to support their child at home. In addition, parents will be kept informed about this goal through attendance at School Leadership Team Meetings, Parents’ Association Meetings and Tea with the Principal. Also, the parent coordinator will set up meetings for parents and teachers that address concerns that the parent may have. The ENL teachers will also provide continuous workshops for caregivers that will September 2018 to June 2019 Instructional Leaders , Teachers, Service Providers Instructional Leaders , Teachers, Parents and all students 1 September 2018 to June 2019 Instructional Leaders , Teachers, Service Providers Instructional Leaders , Teachers, Parents and all students keep caregivers informed and prepared to support their children as per Chancellor’s Regulation Part 154. Related Service Providers will conduct Bilingual Workshops for Parents. All constituents will build capacity on the element of trust through the following meetings: ● School Leadership Team Meetings ● UFT Consultation Meeting ● Parent Teacher Association ● Student Ambassadors We will also continue inviting our school community to all the yearly activities that bring our school together. Parents and staff will also be encouraged to fill our surveys that inform administration on the different needs of our school community; including refection logs on what works and what is recommended. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will have the opportunity to take part in a variety of workshops where they will obtain information on how to work alongside our school to support their child at home. In addition, parents will be kept informed about this goal through attendance at School Leadership Team Meetings, Parents’ Association Meetings and Tea with the Principal. Also, the parent coordinator will set up meetings for parents and teachers that address concerns that the parent may have. The ENL teachers will also provide continuous workshops for parents that will keep parents informed and prepared to support their children as per Chancellor’s Regulation Part 154. Related Service Providers will conduct Bilingual Workshops for Parents. We will also continue inviting our school community to all the yearly activities that bring our school together. Parents and staff will also be encouraged to fill our surveys that inform administration on the different needs of our school community; including refection logs on what works and what is recommended. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to achieve our annual goal for Supportive Environment we will create monthly calendar of events that will go out to all parents, common planning preps for all teachers, monthly calendar of Committee meetings, Engage NY, 2  Curricular Programs (Ready Gen, Code X, Go Math, CMP3) all teachers will have a copy of the school discipline code, Leaders and Administrators Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The school will use Running Records and Mid- Point Benchmark Assessment that are aligned with our Curricular Programs/ CCLS from Schoolnet through out the year to measure progress. The first meeting will focus on identifying the needs based on the Learning Environment Survey Results, Reflection on our school progress in supportive environment Sept to Nov, Dec to Jan, Feb to March, and April to June ( 4 Reflection and adjustments Meetings) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Running Records from TC /FP ,Periodic Assessments / CORE Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teachers and other staff members routinely engage in professional collaborations at PS/IS 157, as noted in the 2014-2015 Quality Review. Teachers rely on colleagues for sharing best practices through inter-visitations, mentorships, one-on-one conversations, turn-keying of professional learning experiences and sharing of expertise, especially from our special education teachers, our ESL teachers, intervention teachers and service providers. These collaborations promote best teaching practices and improved student achievement. As indicated in the 2014- 2015 Quality Review, progress and student data are not always intentionally used in daily lesson and unit plans. Teacher teams will meet together and plan in a coherent manner that will reflect daily adjustments to lessons to raise all students’ awareness of their next steps, especially in writing. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will collaborate to identify at least one promising math and ELA instructional practice to be utilized shcool-wide, as evidenced by two inter-visitation cycles of both vertical and horizontal teacher teams, focused on student's ability to explain their mathematical thinking and/or read informational texts. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers will collaborate regularly and use protocols for looking at student writing work for the purpose of determining next steps and reflects on what has worked or needs revision.  Teachers will receive a wide variety of professional learning on how to address the needs of special populations and struggling learners, including Universal Design for Learning (UDL), multiple entry points and differentiation of instruction.  Teachers will receive a wide variety of professional learning on how to address the needs of special populations and struggling learners, including Universal Design for Learning (UDL), multiple entry points and differentiation of instruction.  Cycles of observation, Learning Walks along with weekly teacher team meetings.  Periodic Data Analysis Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teaching Staff September 2018 to June 2019 School Leaders, Special Education Professionals, IEP Teacher, Teaching Staff, ESL Teachers, Literacy Coach, Professional Learning Committees ● Collaborative planning time for teachers across grades of students with special populations (students with disabilities and ELL students) to modify curriculum to address specific needs & best practices. All teaching staff September 2018 to June 2019 School leaders will attend meetings and participate in decision making. ● Grade level inquiry teams focus on change strategies to improve student to student discussion & best practices. Vertical teams meet monthly to analyze data and look for trends across grades & best practices. ● Analysis of student work, using protocols, to identify areas of strength and relative weakness, and to create plans for addressing those needs. ● Parents will be notified of events/activities involving their children through phone calls, letters, newsletters, flyers, global connect messages. ● Parents will be invited to Tuesday parent engagement, and workshops to explain the mutual collaboration of our staff to September 2018 to June 2019 School leaders, teaching staff, Parent Coordinator All parents and caregivers will be notified about student 5 help service their children and work on greater student achievement To ensure teacher-teacher trust, teachers will engage in peer inter-visitations to establish strong partnerships that: ● build confidence ● establish effective teaching practices enhance interdependence amongst colleagues 3b – Parent and Family Engagement instruction, extra help and important tests All constituents of the school community. School leaders September 2018 to June 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be notified of events/activities involving their children through phone calls, letters, newsletters, flyers, global connect messages. Parents will be invited to Tuesday parent engagement, and workshops to explain the mutual collaboration of our staff to help service their children and work on greater student achievement Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Scheduling common preps (at least twice a week), so that teachers can meet with grade-level colleagues. ● Schedule monthly vertical team meetings to ensure articulation between grades about supporting at-risk or low performing students. ● Scheduling of 80-minute professional learning on Monday afternoons. ● Use of Danielson Frame Work for Teachers and Advance for teacher evaluations. ● Scheduling for inter-visitations ● Substitute teachers coverage for teachers who go out for professional learning ● Use of New York City Department of Education resources, to help support teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 6  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will used and analyzed the data from the Mid- Point Benchmark , Running Records and Assessments aligned with our Curricular Programs/ CCLS from Schoolnet through out the school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. CORE Assessments, NYC Benchmark assessments and Teacher Made Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Instructional leaders will collaborate closely with teachers to analyze student data and look for patterns and trends among the student population. For this school year, 2018-2019 the results of the State tests include the following: 18% of the students scored proficient in ELA and only 2% of the students in SE were proficient. In Math, 17% of the students scored proficient and only 5% of the SE students were proficient. The ENL students scores reflected a 19% proficiency in ELA and a 15% proficiency in mathematics. With this statistically information we will take into consideration the demographics of the school which boasts a very high percentage of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. They will also look closely at the higher achieving students’ data to make sure we continue to challenge them in daily instruction. Instructional leaders will also make sure that missed opportunities for all learners to fully exercise and apply critical and analytical thinking and high levels of involvement in discussions are applied in classrooms and made aware to teachers in planning lessons. (QR 1.2) After charting the needs and highlighting the weaknesses, teacher teams and instructional leaders will maximize the opportunities for students to learn and establish an alignment to the Common Core Learning Standards in particular, the writing across the curriculum. Instructional Leaders will maintain a strict coherence to the Danielson Framework and provide opportunity for growth in their professional pedagogy. Instructional leaders will make sure that teachers, when planning, are conscious of making sure that some questions and tasks are generated by the students, extensions to the lessons fully engage higher achieving students and there is a deeper connection between the concepts learned and real world application to push their thinking beyond the task (QR1.2) In addition, instructional leaders will provide feedback that is goal referenced, actionable and ongoing. Timely feedback will be paramount, following an observation. Teachers and leaders purposefully use common assessments aligned to curricula in all subjects and consistently track student progress toward goals. Social-emotional Support will begin with Pre-K track thrive theme based on social emotional needs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leadership will support teachers in their professional responsibilities, as evident by providing professional development opportunities to staff and creating "promising practices PD series" led by Franklin Magnet staff. 8  9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? In ELA, we will further enhance the use of Reciprocal Teaching in grades 3-8. In addition we will use vocabulary strategies to increase comprehension and develop better conversation skills. All students September 2018 to June 2019 Instructional Leaders and teachers In Math, we will increase our writing capacity across all grades focusing on informative/explanatory short responses to math skills learned. We will increase Fundation Remediation in Grades K-2. Increase mathematical strategic thinking skills and rigour to math instruction with the introduction of the Math Exemplars. Our two ENL teachers will meet and confer with classroom teachers and use a push in model whenever possible to achieve better results. All ELL's K-8 September 2018 to June 2019 Instructional Leaders and teachers Students with disabilities will be educated in ICT or Self-contained classes with the use of multiple entry points and scaffolding. Teachers will incorporate the various learning styles and be aware of multiple intelligences so as to provide the most conducive learning tools. Parents will be surveyed and workshops set up to review class work and homework in ELA and Math. The workshops will be conducted in English and Spanish. Additional newsletters, global connect phone messages and progress reports will be sent home to inform parents of current work and testing that is taking place. Parents will be informed at all PTA meetings of upcoming events and academic programs. The SLT will meet and discuss the best ways to meet student goals and share findings among their membership. Teachers will know they have the support of the Instructional Leaders and that opportunity for professional learning will be made available through workshops, inter-visitation, webinars All Parents September 2018 to June 2019 Instructional Leaders and teachers & Parent Coordinator September 2018 to June 2019 Instructional Leaders and teachers & Parent Coordinator All constituents of school population 0 and collaborative meetings such as vertical inquiry will take place to enhance their pedagogical growth. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We engage families through monthly PTA meetings, frequent calls using our Global Connect phone system regarding school events and attendance, Remind, an application based program that translates text messages between parties, monthly family workshops focused on student achievement and social-emotional development, and a series of school-based events targeted at engaging our families in the life of our school. Our Parent Coordination serves as the point person. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. This action plan can be supported through effective planning and rigorous tasks using our Curricular Programs and CCLS. Teachers can collaborate and meet to look at student work during Tuesday Teacher Teams, with Vertical Inquiry members, and on Common Preps. Additional support to the staff to reach our goals will be provided by weekly Professional Learning Activities that will enhance our ELA and Math instruction. After school programs can help support students by preparing them for state tests. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Through out the year we will use Benchmark Assessments aligned with our Curricular Programs/ CCLS from Schoolnet and Core Program assessments to measure sufficient progress towards our annual goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Running Records from TC /FP ,Periodic Assessments / CORE Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. SLT Parent members and Title I Committee Advisory (PAC) Board meet with the Principal and Parent Coordinator to review and assess the school’s academic programs at the beginning and at the end of each school year. Revision of data on tests scores, Environmental School Surveys, and findings for improvement found on Quality Review are analyzed to set new goals and prepare a plan of action. Based on having a high percentage of students who are asthmatic and/or have a family history of diabetes we felt it was important to educate our community on living a healthy lifestyle through the implementation of health and wellness. Based on the variety of opportunities for parent participation but the lack of different parent participants we feel the need to have a plan to raise level of parent participation. Our goal is to keep the parents informed of their right to be involved. Close attention will be given to all students living in temporary shelters. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, The Franklin Magnet School will increase collaboration between scholars, caregivers, and TFMS staff as evidenced by the creation of a "day of service" event, during which all scholars, staff, and and at least 3 parents per class will participate in a service learning project. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Through out the year parents will be provided with different PTA meetings, parent teacher conferences , monthly parent workshops and celebrate career day with local professionals. All parents will be invited to a variety of healthy lifestyle workshops, e.g., Yoga, Zumba and healthy cooking classes. Parents and Students September 2018 to June 2019 Instructional leaders, teachers and parent coordinator Through out the year classes will be offered in both English and Spanish to satisfy the needs of our high Spanish speaking community. Translation options will also be provided for all workshops and/or notices that go home. Parents and Students September 2018 to June 2019 Instructional leaders, teachers and parent coordinator Teachers including clusters, ESL and other staff members will work on a monthly newsletter to update the parents on all the events, assessments and instructional activities their child is part of. PTA meetings and School Leadership Meetings will include in the agendas information for our parents and communities about our school, our successes and the areas in which we have plans to improve. Through Title I funding parents receive stipend for attending workshop to support their children’s academics. Workshops will include support for all needs. Parents needs and concerns based on all subgroups will be addressed this included workshops that focused on SE students, ENL students and unique needs like students in shelters. Parents will have the opportunity to take part in a variety of workshops where they will obtain information on how to work alongside our school to support their child at home. In addition, parents will be kept informed about this goal through attendance at School Leadership Team Meetings, Parents’ Association Meetings and Tea with the Principal. Also, the parent coordinator will set up meetings for parents and teachers that address concerns that the parent may have. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents and Students September 2018 to June 2019 Instructional leaders, teachers and parent coordinator Parents and Students September 2018 to June 2019 Instructional leaders, teachers and parent coordinator If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 3  Parents will have the opportunity to take part in a variety of workshops where they will obtain information on how to work alongside our school to support their child at home. In addition, parents will be kept informed about this goal through attendance at School Leadership Team Meetings, Parents’ Association Meetings and Tea with the Principal. Also, the parent coordinator will set up meetings for parents and teachers that address concerns that the parent may have. Through out the year a monthly calendar will be sent out to inform parents of all school activities, workshops, trips and celebrations. Instructional Consultant will be invited to provide with different topics that will help with parenting. Blackboard Connect will continue to be utilized to reach parents via phone of any pertinent information. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I Parent Involvement, PTA Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Running Records from TC /FP ,Periodic Assessments / CORE Assessments Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Suggestion boxes and surveys will be in place in November for Parental input and ideas. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Data from ELA Core Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Journeys Small groups During the school Curriculum ,City and State (K-5), Educating Powerful Writers (6-8), instruction using UDL, day Assessments, progress monitoring through the SIT team in collaboration with the teachers. Wilson/Fundation, RTI, Reciprocal Multiple Entry Points, Academic programs (3 to 5 students) Teaching Closed Reading, MSQI (6-8) DRP(Degree of Reading Power) Results Thinking Maps to support the writing Baseline Assessments across different genres, Lightsail, Highlighting important information in a text when reading Go Math (k-5) Small group During the school Mathematics Data from Math Core Curriculum, Engage NY (6-8), City and State Practice Skill for instruction using UDL, day Multiple Entry Points 5  Assessments, progress monitoring through the SIT team in collaboration with the teachers. Fluency, Modeling (3 to 5 students) with a peer best practices that will show their conceptual understanding Hand on Science Data from Core Small group During the school Curriculum Experiments, instruction using Day. assessments and Strategies to do UDL, Multiple Entry NYS Science test for research and how Point (3 to 5 grade 4 and 8 to support their students Social Studies Data From the Core Curriculum Assessments hypothesis, Thinking Maps, Highlighting important information in a text when reading Passport to Social Studies to support their understanding and guide them with Small group During the school instruction using UDL, Multiple Entry day Points (3 to 5 students) writing, strategies to do research to support their thinking 6  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students that are Strategies to Small groups based During the school failing in meeting support them with on student need their academic improving their day standards , students who need guidance with behavior expectations; they are taught alternative ways to deal with problem situations and students that come across a crisis situation behavior and academics through focusing, character development, Pair/Peer grouping to assist in understanding how to get along with peers, Dealing with crisis 7  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. PS/IS 157 will provide the following services for students living in shelters 13 students 1. Academic Intervention Services 2. Homework Help 3. Guidance services including access to staff psychologist 4. PD sessions for parents 5. Transportation to and from school as needed and the provision of a metro-card. 6. Student Counseling(Group and Individual) 7. Monitoring grades 8. Supplies, Uniforms, Payments for class trips or any other Activities Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 8 We are planning to give those students free uniforms and school supplies. Students who need Metro Cards will 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. School uniforms, school supplies, funds for grade and school events receive them as well. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 69,060 9  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. To attract Highly Qualified Teachers we will have representation at Hiring Fairs and College Fairs. An Interview Panel which consists of Administration, Parents, and UFT Members has been created to ensure that any possible hiring will benefit our students. Professional development opportunities will be ongoing to ensure all teachers continue to develop and enhance pedagogical skills and maintain Highly Qualified teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  All teachers and paraprofessionals will receive Professional Development align to the Framework and utilize EngageNY for additional support, to enhance their Pedagogical skills in order to stay current on new strategies in their field along with the Common Core Learning Standards.  Teachers will participate in District Collaborative Share  All teachers will be supported throughout the year to review and modify curriculum so that it is responsive to needs and interests.  As a Wellness School Teachers will have the opportunity to learn about research based initiatives that help foster Healthy life styles and beneficial eating habits. They will be included in all planning stages and learn about the School Health Index to implement various Programs.  Teachers will continue to be supported through specific and timely feedback. Feedback is based on the Danielson's Framework for teaching and based on low inference observations.  Collaborative learning walks will take place on a monthly basis to identify strategies and techniques that can be incorporated effectively in the classroom. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 0  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Pre-school children are introduced gradually into the future kindergarten curriculum by visits to the kindergarten classes and other specialty classes such as: the art lab, the computer lab, the multii-media center, the physical education class and the science lab. Pre-school students also join the rest of the students in the cafeteria for breakfast and lunch. Teachers will use the Pre-K for all planning units and standards on a consistent and coherent basis. They will also use the the NYS foundation to the Common Core Standards. During parent engagement Tuesdays, parents will be invited to the pre/k classrooms to visit and meet the kindergarten teachers and learn more about the curriculum. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers follow the prescribed assessments from the various programs utilized by the school. Teachers meet during their weekly common preps to monitor instruction and set up a schedule for testing. The data from testing is used to drive instruction and decide on the instructional focus for the next professional development. Various meetings take place to support instruction including: vertical inquiry meetings where data is analyzed to set expectations. Professional development will be given to help familiarize staff with components of the data system, data culture, and data use. During the Instructional Cabinet meetings, teachers will discuss and plan for instructional decisions like assessments used and benchmarks. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount 1  each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) X x X N/A X N/A Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 384,765 27,851 112,366 N/A 3,521,934 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 2   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 3  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Benjamin Franklin Health & Science Academy, PS/IS 157, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Benjamin Franklin Health & Science Academy, PS/IS 157 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ─ Workshops in literacy, math, technology, and other areas of need chosen by our parents are scheduled and offered to parents every month, and throughout the school year. This year Parents were offered the opportunity to learn typing through a web based program. receive school prepared materials and literature to support their children learning, including a series of materials, websites and guides from The Parent Guide to Students Success and Engage NY. ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 4  ─ Parents receive the support and education from the Parent Coordinator through workshops on PTA, SLT and CEP so that they are better prepared to be effectively involved in their children’s education, at home and school. ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ─ Teachers cultivate a caring home-school communication by conferencing/calling at least once a week to inform parents about their children academic progress and behavior. ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ─ Parents attend scheduled workshops at school on City, State and Federal standards and assessments. Supporting materials are used by the Department of Education website, Engage NY. ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ─ Parents receive information about the school activities and meetings in a variety of ways such as, monthly calendars send home with students, phone calls send home by Black Board Connect. In addition, information is shared with parents during the PTA and Title I Meetings, and at Parents Workshops. Letters and messages are translated into Spanish, the language mostly spoken by parents, and also interpretation services are offered during workshops, PTA and Title I meetings. ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ─ The Parent Coordinator holds informational meetings, workshops/trainings, Program Assessment Meetings on PTA, Title I, SLT and CEP. In addition, parent leaders also review and update the two Parental Involvement documents contained in our school’s CEP, The Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) and the School Parent Compact (SPC) 5  ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● The Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. 6  This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; Book Club for Parents ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Benjamin Franklin Health & Science Academy, PS/IS 157, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 7  Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 8  Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 9  ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 0 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials The classes will meet&nbsp;twice a week on Wednesdays&nbsp;and&nbsp;Thursdays&nbsp;from The program will be offered to all grades and all proficiency levels of&nbsp;ELL's. Students will be selected after completing auditions all grades are welcome to participate There will be 4&nbsp;groups consisting of 8-10&nbsp;students per class. Each class will have one ENL licensed teacher. If necessary, ENL teachers will team teach Begin description here: Supplemental Program In analyzing the school NYSESLAT and ELA state test results, it is evident that our students did not make the adequate progress expected by the PS/IS 157 after school program aims to meet the specific needs of all English Language Learners (ELL’s) and their subgroups such as the SIFE, newcomers, long term ELLs and special education students. Students focus on their individual academic need and proficiency level. Our goal is to support all ELL’s in reaching proficiency scores on the ELA/NYSESLAT through the use of, but not limited to, strategies to enhance comprehension and vocabulary skills and differentiation according to their area of need Listening/Speaking or Reading /Writing. PS/IS 157 has a large number of ELL’s that are not meeting adequate growth as expected according to the Common Core Learning Standards. In addition, after analyzing the results of the 2018 Fall NYSESLAT test the majority our students’ reaching proficiency need extra support in the modalities of reading and writing. Our school will offer after school Reader's Theater Program. The Literacy Enrichment Program is proposed to start on February 27, 2018 and run for 21 sessions until May 30, 2018. The students will be group for instruction as follows: · 2:30-4:30 · · · · with&nbsp;content area&nbsp;teachers that have flexibility to meet and &nbsp;allow for collaboration. · The instructional focus will be oral language enrichment and literacy development.&nbsp; Our ELLs will benefit from Reader's Theater activities in a number of ways, including fluency practice, comprehension, engaging in a story, and focusing on vocal and physical expression. · necessary. · and at second performance will be held in the evening for parents and general community. · will observe instruction, provide support to participating staff/students, and monitor student and teacher attendance, articulate between the official classroom teachers and the after school program. There&nbsp;are&nbsp;other programs running at the same time so Title III does not need to fund a supervisor &nbsp; · not pay&nbsp;with title&nbsp;III funds&nbsp;21 sessions from 3:00pm to 4:30pm. · attendance sheets and program notifications to parents in their preferred languages. · Assessments. A licensed supervisor will coordinate and monitor the After School Title III programs. The supervisor Records and student data will be maintained and available weekly by the supervisor including The data analysis conducted to sustain our programs is based on NYSESLAT and ELL Baseline All instruction will be in English with the implementation of Native Language support when Final Reader’s Theater performance will be at school auditorium for all school personnel enjoyment The supervisor regular hours are from 7am to 3pm. &nbsp;The Readers Theater &nbsp;program will 2  The materials to be used are web-based licensed Students will have the opportunity&nbsp;to visit a cultural activity such as a theater to Students will be engaged on Readers&nbsp;Teather&nbsp;activities&nbsp;and using the web based Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information · visualize&nbsp;how&nbsp;a live play takes place to then apply this knowledge on their own performance at school. · programs&nbsp;ESL&nbsp;Reading&nbsp;Smart&nbsp;and&nbsp;school&nbsp;play&nbsp;script&nbsp;purchased&nbsp;for&nbsp;Readers&nbsp;Theater&nbsp;final&nbsp;school performance&nbsp;these are all&nbsp;supplemental and distinct from those used in class for daily instruction. · programs&nbsp;ESL&nbsp;Reading&nbsp;smart to support language and visuals. In order to provide a quality supplemental instructional program, the following materials will be purchased using the Title III funds: The funds will be used to purchase the ESL Reading Smart licenses and other supplemental materials such as classroom libraries for the use of our ELLs and general supplies to be used during the program. The purchase details are as follows one ESL Reading Smart license, leveled classroom libraries and general supplies to be used during the program. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: Professional Development There is no component of the Professional development to be at cost for the title III program. Data results for ELL’s indicate that our students would benefit from explicit instruction with support or scaffolds that allow for guidance through the learning process. Based on this need, our Title III Professional Development topics will include but not be limited to: · Kira&nbsp;Bonn&nbsp;for&nbsp;K-2 Teachers · Pimentel&nbsp;ENL&nbsp;teacher&nbsp;&nbsp; · Pinnell&nbsp;Training&nbsp;by JasonFuller, Universal&nbsp;Literacy&nbsp;Coach&nbsp;for&nbsp;K-5&nbsp;teachers · Designing&nbsp;Coherent&nbsp;Instruction&nbsp;for&nbsp;all&nbsp;teachers · · · June&nbsp;twice&nbsp;a year These PD ‘s will provide teachers with the necessary tools to impact students across all content areas including the support of our Title III programs. To keep record of PD agendas and attendance sheets will be collected and available to view upon request. November&nbsp;5, 2018 Reciprocal&nbsp;Teaching&nbsp;for&nbsp;all&nbsp;teachers Ipad&nbsp;teacher training&nbsp;sessions&nbsp;TBA&nbsp;throughout&nbsp;the year Project&nbsp;Based&nbsp;Learning&nbsp;(PBL) November&nbsp;-October&nbsp;17-19, 2018 Wilson&nbsp;Reading&nbsp;Training, Ms October&nbsp;2, 2018 Foundations&nbsp;Training&nbsp;by October-December (6 week&nbsp;cycles) Fountas&nbsp;&amp; October&nbsp;22, 2018 3 Part C: Professional Development rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: Parent engagement Based on the Learning Environment Survey and other surveys administered to the parents, our parents will benefit from a variety of workshops. Therefore, the Title III parental involvement takes place in many different forms. PS/IS 157 strongly believe that when parents are involved in their child’s school, their child experiences a higher level of academic achievement. In addition, in order to raise parent participation, our school offers a variety of workshops at no cost to parents on the following topics: Curriculum, homework, testing, NYSESLAT, ENL strategies at home, nutrition, and many other services that will provide the necessary support our parents need. Parents/students also have access to online programs like the ESL Reading Smart to work at home with their child. Some parent workshops/activities have been tentatively scheduled as follows: Urban Advantage family passes to visit partner institutions October 9, 2018 Multicultural Celebration October 17, 2018- Dad brings kids to school March 5, 2019 ELL parent informational session- Mrs Castro March 2019-Parents trip El Repertorio Español Theater May 2019 Cinco de Mayo Celebration May 30, 2019- Readers Theater show All parents participate in publishing parties held by teacher in all grades during the school year. This allows for all parents to be updated and informed of their child’s education. Translations are provided in all workshops, and meetings are conducted in the language spoken by the parents. The parental community is very much involved with our Parent Teacher Association. Our Title III program will offer parents the opportunity to visit with the Reader's Theater students the theater El Repertorio Español to enjoy play. The last session parents will meet again to view the performance of the play at the school auditorium. These activities will be provided by the ENL teachers, the parent coordinator, and other support members or our school district and/or network. Records of activities agendas, attendance sheets and/or invitations in parents preferred languages will be maintained in a variety of ways. They will archived in the main office and in the parent coordinator's office. They will also be available for parents upon request. Parents are kept informed with an English/Spanish monthly activity calendar. They also will receive notifications of these meetings via notices and through the School Messenger System. Parents will also be notified via letter or invitation to participate and view Reader's Theater final performance. Parents will also have the opportunity to visit a English/Spanish theater performance with students. 4 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 14 School Name The Benjamin Franklin Magnet School Borough Brooklyn School Number 157 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Kourtney Boyd Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Connie A. Castro Teacher/Subject Area N/A Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent N/A Assistant Principal Sara Medina Coach N/A School Counselor N/A Parent N/A Parent Coordinator Christian Rodriguez Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 481 6 Total number of ELLs 97 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 20.17%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 1 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 1 1 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 2 0 0 2 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools used to assess early literacy skills are MOSLs, ELL Periodic Assessments, Running Records, Journey´s reading and writing assessments and DRA is also used by some of our teachers. NYSESLAT scores are also shared with all the teachers and they provide us with benchmark information on reading, listening and writing skills. These assessments provide data that indicates our students reading and writing performances for instructional and intervention purposes. They provide us with formative information on student learning that will enhance and redirect our instruction. Journey´s assessments require for all students including the ELL's to use content specific language. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our ELLs receive instructional supports in each classroom. The supports are different in each classroom and depends on the students individual needs. Some of the supports are for to teachers to be aware of the relationship between a students native 7  language and English, provide students classrooms with language rich environments, support academic language development for example by previewing the text among other strategies, and teachers provide students frequent opportunities to collaborate with peers in large/small groups. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our programs for ELL's is evaluated by how many of our students reach proficiency and how much growth they've achieved each year. Our students are assessed with state tests, baselines assessments, and NYSESLAT. They provide us with formative information on student learning that will enhance and redirect classroom instruction. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? To address response to intervention model teachers continuously monitor student growth and progress among the ELL's in all their formal and informal assessments such as rubrics, portfolios, project based learning, exit slips, debates, oral language presentations among other. The programs in place also include ENL strategies to support instruction. Teachers provide students with the resources needed to support our ELLs. Some interventions implemented after progress monitoring are providing our students with grade appropriate content with native language support, promote language and vocabulary development throughout the day, scaffolding language and opportunities to respond such as paraphrasing key words, peer pairing and small group instruction. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Once the needs for the ELL's are identified, students are provided with increasingly intensive targeted instruction designed to match their learning needs. Teachers work with students in small groups and align instruction based on their needs and the expectations of the Common Core Learning Standards. Instruction for ELLs starts in tier 1 instructional level. Students move into Tier 2 if they demonstrate a need for more targeted and intensive academic support. Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) For each English language learner who scores below specified levels of performance on the annual English language proficiency assessment, the school must determine the additional support services to provide the student, taking into consideration evidence such as the following: • Number of years of instruction in a bilingual education or English as a new language program • English and home language literacy • Content area and socio-emotional support needs of students with inconsistent/interrupted formal education (SIFE) • English and home language literacy needs of long-term ELLs • Results on the annual English language proficiency assessment exam • Bilingual education or English as a second language teacher recommendation • Content area teacher recommendation • Parent or guardian request • Sample of student work in English and, if possible, in the home language • Bilingual educational evaluation, if the student has or is suspected of having a disability 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data allows us to know the levels of English proficiency of each student. The data also reveals that the mayority of our ELLs are at Expanding level. Grade Entering Emerging Transitioning Expanding Commanding K 3 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 3 2 0 3 2 5 0 3 1 3 1 7 5 4 0 2 1 6 0 5 1 3 3 5 1 8  6 1 3 3 3 1 7 1 2 4 0 0 8 0 1 0 6 4 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Grade Team Meetings/Professional Development/Parent Meetings-Workshops Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. PS/IS 157 meets the need of our ELLs with integrated and stand-alone organizational models. The program models currently used for the ENL program are block, graded, heterogeneous and homogeneous depending on the students proficiency levels. Each group is carefully formed after analyzing the student’s individual needs and proficiency level. Flexible grouping for academic intervention, differentiation, and integrating ELLs into heterogeneous classes is practiced based on student needs and learning targets. Multiple means of assessment are used to address the needs of the students and accommodating the best ENL model and the units of ENL mandated by the CR part 154. Regular inquiry meetings are in place, where data is gathered and analyzed to track the development of students and teachers over time, and allow for appropriate program selections and instructional decisions. b. TBE program. If applicable. Currently we do not offer bilingual programs c. DL program. If applicable. Instruction in our dual language program is delivered with a side by side model students. The Kindergarten and first grade students are block together and grouped heterogeneously. The program used for instruction is Journey's in English/Spanish for in mathematics Go Math is used. All other content areas are given both in English and Spanish depending on the day. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The organizational models at PS/IS 157 Freestanding ENL stand-alone and integrated classes. In the ENL programs the students are grouped according to their level of language proficiency. All entering and emerging students’ receive 360 minutes of instruction. Transitioning and expanding students receive 180 minutes of instruction of integrated ENL in ELA or content area with a common goal of successfully achieving academic rigor in English Language Arts. Commanding students receive 90 minutes of instruction of integrated ENL in ELA or content area. This time is used as a transition for developing student’s needs and preparing them to successfully interact and show progress in a monolingual setting. We have two certified ESL teachers in place. One ENL teacher services grades K-4 and the other ENL teacher services grades 5-8. All ELL's will receive mandated units of study as required and specified by CR part 154 assuring they receive the necessary stand-alone ENL and Integrated ENL instruction guidelines. 9  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our ENL program focuses on the content areas by providing instruction in English and integrating ENL during the different content areas. The ENL teachers intentionally design learning opportunities that integrate reading, writing, speaking, and listening with the practices of each discipline. ENL classes on all grades have a heterogeneous grouping structure based on their levels of proficiency. Teachers’ work by differentiating and/or using scaffolding methodologies during instruction for ELL’s to attain English proficiency. The strategies used from the workshop models are employed for language acquisition. Classrooms also provide a print rich environment, with picture cards, word walls and leveled classroom libraries in English and Spanish, scaffolding, modifying, vocabulary/language development, sentence stems. among other approaches. Integrating subject matter to ENL strategies is a common practice to acquire academic language and support knowledge of all content area. In science for example, through scientific inquiry, students develop learning processes inherent in thinking: observing, classifying, comparing, communicating, measuring, inferring, predicting, and using hands-on materials and texts with visuals (diagrams, charts, and pictures) to clarify meaning. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? All our ELL's are evaluated in their native language as part of the initial evaluation by using the Spanish Lab-R. We provide our students with a choice of freestanding ENL services or transitional bilingual services. For this reason, we currently, do not partake in the ELE assessments. In previous years, our ELL's took the ELE and the test scores continuously demonstrated that the majority of our population of students are not literate in their native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. The SIFE students’ receive the maximum units of support and academic rigor. Instruction focuses on students’ growth and individual success as indicated in the state tests, periodic assessments and class work. Assessment and goal setting is aligned with instruction for all student needs to reach and maximize their learning potential. Our focus for these students according to their needs is developing their writing skills by using a variety of strategies and activities to support them. b. The new incoming ELL’s are targeted by providing meaningful and authentic activities with language practice opportunities. The instructional plan is to prepare these students for the NYS English Language Arts Test and reach proficiency. c. Our developing ELLs are mostly in grades 3-5 with 4 to 6 years of service receive the mandated time of support units and are grouped by levels while differentiating according to their language specific need. Our focus for long term ELL's according to the data on multiple assessments is developing their writing skills by using a variety of strategies and activities to support them. d. Long term ELL's receive the maximum amount of instructional minutes required in addition to after school and/or Saturday programs to meet their needs. e. Former ELLs receive all ELL testing accommodations and mandated time of instruction integrated with ELA to support with the ENL teacher. All our ELLs participate in the school supplemental programs and activities that would benefit their language development. All ELLs and former ELLs for up to two years after testing out are eligible for ELL testing accommodations, in addition to any accommodations on their IEPs or 504 Plans, if applicable. Schools should determine which accommodations are most suitable and beneficial (will maximize the potential for achievement on all exams) for each ELL at the beginning of the school year. ELLs are entitled to using those accommodations for most assessments, including those that are teacher-made and State-mandated. ELLs are not entitled to ELL testing accommodations on the NYSESLAT. We provide testing accommodations to ELLs, as needed, on all NYS ELA and content-area assessments (i.e., mathematics, science and social studies). Schools must make all necessary arrangements to make these accommodations available for ELLs 0  who need them. A list of NYS-approved accommodations may be found in the School Administrator's Manual (SAM) for each respective test. Testing accommodations for ELL students on the NYS ELA and content-area assessments include the following: • Time extension (all exams): Schools may extend the test time for ELL students on NYS ELA and content-area assessments and on Regents examinations. Principals may use any reasonable extensions, such as "time and a half" (the required testing time plus half that amount), in accordance with their best judgment about the needs of the ELL students. Principals should consult with the student's classroom teacher in making these determinations. However, there are no time limits. • Separate location (all exams): Schools are encouraged to provide optimal testing environments and facilities for ELL students. NYS assessments may be administered to ELLs individually or in small groups in a separate location. • Third reading of listening selection (English Language Arts exams only): Proctors may read the listening passage three times to ELLs on grades 3-8 English Language Arts assessments and on the Regents Comprehensive Examination in English. • Bilingual dictionaries and/or glossaries: ELLs may use bilingual glossaries when taking State examinations in all subjects except languages other than English exams (LOTE). The bilingual dictionaries and glossaries may provide only direct one-to-one translations of words. Bilingual dictionaries and/or glossaries that provide definitions or explanations are not permitted. Bilingual glossaries in the content areas are available for downloading. • Simultaneous use of English and alternative language editions are not allowed for English Language Arts examinations. For state examinations for which SED provides written translations, ELLs may use both English and an alternative language edition of the test simultaneously. However, they should be instructed to record all of their responses in only one language. The alternative language edition used by the student should be so indicated on the student's answer sheet. • Oral translations for low incidence languages are not allowed for English Language Arts examinations. Schools may provide ELL students with an oral translation of a state examination when there is no translated edition provided by SED. All translations must be oral, direct translations of the English editions. Written translations are not allowed. No clarifications or explanations may be provided. Translators should receive copies of the English edition of the tests one hour prior to administration. • Writing responses in the home language are not allowed for English Language Arts examinations. ELL students making use of alternative language editions or of oral translations of state examinations may write their responses to the open-ended question in their home languages. Scoring the tests is the responsibility of the school. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? In a classroom where a variety of instructional strategies are present every day, students are deeply engaged and challenged. The teachers in these classrooms see the benefits of using these strategies to put their students in charge of their own learning. The programs in place support learning for all subgroups. Supplementary support for ELL's and SWD are a part of the Ready Gen program used for literacy and Go Math program also has support for these students including intervention support for tiers 2 and 3 for intervention. Wilson fundamental is also used to support SWD who need phonemic and fluency support in literacy. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The diverse needs of our ELL-SWDs are met by carefully scheduling their individual needs to a flexible program within an ICT or self-contained classroom as recommended by the school Implementation Team (SIT) team. These students are placed in an ICT class after careful consideration by the SIT team. These students have also had academic interventions in tier 1 and 2. Also, a variety of instructional strategies are present every day for all our students including ELL’s-SWDs, students are deeply engaged, challenged, and are exposed to Common Core aligned instruction. Teachers take into account student’s prior knowledge, thinking maps or graphic organizers, modeling among other strategies are used with appropriate grade level materials to provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English Language development. All teachers including ICT classroom teachers receive yearly PD on how to strategies and plan for ELL's including those students who also have a learning disability. Depending on the students strengths and academic ability they are being mainstreamed in LA, Math, Science or any other 1  content area with the support of the ENL teacher and continuous professional development that supports teachers of ELLs. All students are given a 2 year time frame to support with RTI and ENL strategies before considering them for an evaluation, unless otherwise stated by parents. The SIT discusses strategies and implements best practices to help meet the needs of the ELLs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, Math and other core content areas are based on individual student progress students are groups by skills of need. Also after school programs are offered covering all content areas. All intervention services are conducted in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For this school year, our ELL’s will benefit from new programs such Makers Space and Greenhouse. Once a week students participate in this interactive classroom programs to reinforce their reading and writing skills. We are also using a new CCLS aligned program for mathematics (Go Math). 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Fortunately, this school year, none of our programs or services will be discontinued for ELL’s. Our school programs are offered to all students and will continue to be offered through the rest of the school year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. There is an equal access opportunity to our programs. We offer an after school programs as previously mentioned for all students and supplemental after school services are offered to target those skills that need extra support. In addition, we offer after school programs such as test prep, sports, champs, and dance, these programs are available to all students including our ELLs. All students including ELL's are equally represented in all programs. We have a high population of ELL's and our attendance roster for these programs indicate that there is an equal representation of ELL's in all academic programs and extra-curricular activities available to our students. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials for ELL’s are Journey´s and My Perspectives. All programs in place are aligned to the CCLS and provide additional support for ELL's and SWD's. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The ENL teachers supports native language thru variation of techniques used to build on students’ prior knowledge acquisition in addition to Spanish libraries and resource books. All required services and resources correspond and support our ELL’s according to their grade level and age. Furthermore, native language is not limited to the ENL classroom. School personnel who are able to provide support to students during the school day provide clarification in their native language. Material in their native language is also available to students and parents. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All Ell’s programs are aligned to CCLS to ensure high-quality instructional practices to facilitate academic excellence for our ELLs. Teachers use materials within the ELL programs that are age and grade appropriate to support ELLs. Careful planning and curricular alignment with general teacher is ensured with stand-alone model to not jeopardize in content instruction of our ELLs. Related Service Providers also work in collaboration with the teachers and the ENL teachers to ensure a quality education for the ELL's. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Currently we are not sharing our building. 2  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Welcome centers are set up for new students and particularly centers with cultural themes and activities to welcome new students. During the registration process the school assists possible newly enrolled ELLs by guiding them through the registration process with the support of our multi-cultural and multi-lingual staff. Open houses and one to one tours are held during the registration period where parents visit the school and the classrooms. Home-school activities and brochures are sent home to invite and inform parents of regular school activities and extracurricular school activities available to our students. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently we are not offering language electives to our students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Our dual language program is a side by side model with full day ELLs integration. Each core content area is taught in both languages. Language is separated for instruction by classroom. The emergent literacy is taught in both languages simultaneously. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All PS/IS 157 personnel receive ongoing professional development in language acquisition that reflects the needs of our school. Skills such as: scaffolding instruction, applying CCSS for ELL's, transferring native language skills, and differentiating lessons based on student data. This professional development is offered thru DELLSS, NYU Brookling North Support Center, BETAC, UFT and among others. ENL teachers are given the opportunity through professional development to collaborate with one another on the delivery of instruction using ENL methodologies to scaffold understanding. Professional Development includes but not limited to: *Teachers and non-pedagogical staff participate from professional development and support offered thru in house and district collaborative shares. * Teachers are supported by cluster or FSC PD, held on a continuous basis and also PD through the Division of students with Disabilities and English Language Learners Office of English Language Learners. We recognize that professional development is a key component to the successful implementation of ELL/LEP program. Professional development opportunities will be provided for all second language teachers and classroom teachers. Our schools recognize the importance of planning and have scheduled common planning times for all teachers by grade. The professional development design, to support our K – 12 ELL Program models, is comprehensive and builds the professional capacity of teachers to ensure the academic achievement of English Language Learners. The professional development program is based 3  on the premises of reflective practice. Teachers and instructional leaders are given opportunities to: *Have information on content and its classroom application *Have time to construct knowledge and understanding of the new information *Have time to implement, practice, and assess the newly learned information *Have time and opportunities to share and reflect on their newly acquired knowledge *Realign, restructure, and practice based on their reflection and professional sharing. Examples of professional development activities include: Scaffolding Instruction for ELLs: Professional Development sessions will focus on supporting teachers of English Language Learners in their understanding of scaffolding instruction for ELLs aligned to the Common Core and research-based instructional strategies for developing content and language with ELL students. In addition, we will focus on instructional strategies in literacy that support language acquisition. We will use the newly issued resources from NYSED for literacy and mathematics, “Scaffolding Instruction for English Language Learners: Resource Guides for English Language Arts and Mathematics”. The resource guides were developed by national experts in ELL instruction, Diane August and Diane Stehr Fenner. Strategies for Enriching Spanish Language Instruction: Reading, writing, listening, and speaking must be taught within a "literate environment", in context that is meaningful to students. Many of our ELLs are literate in Spanish but they struggle to apply the knowledge they know in English. These workshops will focus on strategies that support literacy and language development in Spanish that will support the acquisition of English. We will discuss how knowledge and skills in first language transfer to second language and how students learn knowledge & skills on-grade level using the native language while learning the second language. Spanish will be the primary language for these sessions. Teachers will discuss educational and academic concepts with colleagues in Spanish. The Power of Two: Professional Development on the planning for and implementation of high quality Dual Language and Bilingual programs using research-based practices. We will discuss the practical issues to consider during the planning and implementation phase. We will discuss best practices in English literacy and the native language in bilingual and dual language programs, strategies that support making cross-linguistic connections and the bridge between languages. Participants will be given an overview of instructional practices specific to teaching reading and writing in each language and a unit design framework for developing and delivering bilingual units of instruction that integrate the teaching of literacy and content as well as guidelines for choosing, creating, and using resources to support bilingualism and bi-literacy. New Teacher Study Group- Participants will receive comprehensive information on instruction in their classrooms which will include, regulations, systems and structures, documentation, methods of assessments, tiered levels of support, instruction, and intervention strategies, case study presentations, considerations for sub populations, as well as numerous opportunities for problem solving and reflection. This is a wonderful opportunity for first- year teachers or teachers new to the current grade they are teaching. Teacher Leader Study Group- A core group of Instructional Lead Teachers from selected schools, , will participate in these advanced sessions which will deepen their learning and allow them to build capacity in their schools as they create lab sites, share best practices and a plethora of resources with new teachers and other colleagues. Additionally, DELLSS offers many opportunities for teachers to attend intensive institutes where they can learn directly from national and in-house experts on how they can begin to make significant changes to their instructional practices for ELLs. Online videos as a supplemental form of professional development to reach the thousands of teachers responsible for ensuring ELLs develop into successful learners in their classrooms are also used. For example, a video series on Response to Intervention was created and posted to support educators on effective strategies for implementing RtI with ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 4  Professional development will be continuous throughout the year in data analysis utilizing engaging and advance to support the transition to servicing middle school students and preparing all students for the rigorous expectations of the CCLS and the New York City Wide Instructional Expectations. PS/IS 157 will provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Agendas and attendance sheets are kept of our professional development in main office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We will be collaborating with the district to offer meetings though out the year. Annually in the spring a conference for parents of ELLs is offered. This conference includes workshops on programs, language development progress , college readiness, STEM, language assessments in all content areas. 2018 New York State English Language Learner Parent Conference in New York City 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. According to CR part 154, schools must individually meet with the parents or guardians of English language learners at least once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians, to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This additional meeting should include school staff necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language development in all content areas in English and in the child’s home language in the case of students enrolled in a bilingual education program. Such meeting is conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. Schools must determine the manner and form of such individual parent meetings, in accordance with collective bargaining agreements. Schools should record attendance using existing procedures. The Benjamin Franklin Magnet School for Civic Leadership in Health & Science, PS/IS 157, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The Franklin Magnet will support parents and families of Title I students by: • providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ─ Workshops in literacy, math, technology, and other areas of need chosen by our parents are scheduled and offered to parents every month, and throughout the school year. This year Parents were offered the opportunity to learn typing through a web based program. receive school prepared materials and literature to support their children learning, including a series of materials, websites and guides from The Parent Guide to Students Success and Engage NY. 5  • providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ─ Parents receive the support and education from the Parent Coordinator through workshops on PTA, SLT and CEP so that they are better prepared to be effectively involved in their children ’ s education, at home and school. • fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; _Parents were offered the tool to monitor their children’s grades and attendance by setting up their accounts with NYS Schools Account. The Parent Coordinator took and active role to support parents with this initiative. ─ Teachers cultivate a caring home-school communication by conferencing/calling at least once a week to inform parents about their children academic progress and behavior. _Teachers had also being assigned one hour a week on Tuesdays to have a one-one conference with parents concerning students behavior and academic progress. • providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ─ Parents attend scheduled workshops at school on City, State and Federal standards and assessments. Supporting materials are used by the Department of Education website, Engage NY. _Parents also receive workshops from experienced school personnel on Literacy, Math, NYS Schools Account, Common Core State Standards and Curriculum. • sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ─ Parents receive information about the school activities and meetings in a variety of ways such as, monthly calendars send home with students, phone calls send home by Black Board Connect. In addition, information is shared with parents during the PTA and Title I Meetings, and at Parents Workshops. Letters and messages are translated into Spanish, the language mostly spoken by parents, and also interpretation services are offered during workshops, Schools Committees, PTA, SLT and Title I meetings. • providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Not applicable at this time 6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Kourtney Boyd, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS/IS 157 Benjamin Franklin School DBN: 14K157 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Kourtney Boyd Title Principal Sara Medina Assistant Principal Christian Rodriguez Parent Coordinator Connie A. Castro ENL/Bilingual Teacher N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 11/21/17 11/21/17 11/21/17 11/21/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 8  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 14k157 School Name: PS/IS 157 The Benjamin Franklin Superintendent: Alicja Winnicki The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use the following sources to gather our parents' language preferences: HLIS, emergency contact cards, language preferences sheets, conversations between parents and teachers as well as by formative observations. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 9 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Our parents' preferred languages are Spanish and Chinese. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The documents that are typically translated are: parent handbooks, school calendars, progress reports , surveys and other important letters that must go home. All letters that go home to the parents are translated and sent home in both English and Spanish. Most letters are also translated in a variety of other languages depending on the language spoken at home. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Throughout the school year our school complies with all face to face meeting as indicated in the NYDOE school calendar. In addition to the dates established by the NYDOE we also have many informal interactions interpretation service(s)? 0  with parents such as open houses, class readings, IEP meetings, 100 day of school activities, among other face to face activities with our parents. During the parent teacher conferences, all students including the ENL will lead the parent conferences in the their home language through student lead discussions. The parent coordinator will be available to translate for teacher-parent meetings when necessary. Workshops lead by staff members and other constituents will be planned for accordingly to have translation available for all parents. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school will fulfil these requirements by providing the parents with access to the view Welcome Posters, Parents Bill of Rights, Parents' Guide to Language Access and Language ID Guide at security desk and main office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 1  We will gather feedback on the quality of our available translation services through parent surveys. The principal also has an open door policy where parents can communicate their concerns. The parent coordinator is also available. Most parents have her direct phone number to address any concerns or any other matter in the school. 2 
