 20K163 School Name: P.S. 163 BATH BEACH Principal: JESSICA RICCIO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Bath Beach School 332000010163 K-8 109 Bay 14 th Street 718-236-9003 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 20K163 718-382-3110 Fax: Mr. Seth Pechter Spechte@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Ms. Jessica Riccio Ms. Orsola Bonilla Ms. JenniferWeinmeier Mr. Seth Pechter N/A N/A N/A n/a District Information Geographical District: 20 Superintendent’s Office Address: Ms. Katrina Costantino Superintendent: 415 89 th Street Brooklyn, NY 11209 Kcostan@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-759-4908 Phone Number: 718-759-4842 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: 4 Executive Director’s Office Address: Cheryl Watson-Harris Executive Director: 415 89th Street cwatson21@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 759 4862 Phone Number: 718-326-8140 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Mr. Seth Pechter Mr. Michael Wengler Ms. Celeste Saponara Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher  Name Ms. Jessica Riccio Ms. Orsola Bonilla Ms. JenniferWeinmeier N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Mr. Monsef Righi Ms. HinaButt Ms. ChristinaCarollo Mrs. MagaliFlores N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS/IS 163’s primary mission is to educate, motivate, and nurture students in a collaborative learning environment. A strong home-school partnership ensures success and encourages a love of learning, so that each child flourishes and develops the skills necessary to become a life long learner and a productive citizen.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS/IS 163 is located in Bath Beach, Brooklyn. We have a diversified student body of students; our population consists of 27% Asian, 2% Black, 36% Hispanic and 33% White. We have 21% English Language Learners, 19% students with IEP’s. PS/IS 163's small population enables our students to feel safe, secure and comfortable. Mutual trust is embedded between the staff and students which has created a reciprocal supportive environment. This has enabled our teachers to know each and every child on a personal basis. Our school community is unique in that we are a K-8 school where most of the children are with us for 9 years, which makes their transition easier from an Elementary school setting to a Middle School setting. This also prepares our students to be College and Career Ready. Our school has formulated partnerships with the following organizations: Italian Federation(The Italian Federation will be holding an after school program in the building for the middle school children. It will consist of Sports and Arts.), Arista Society, STEAM, The Urban Barcoding Project, Rockefeller University, El Museo del Barrio, Ballet Hispanico, City Growers, American Museum of Natural History,Hispanic Society of America,Flamenco ,Latino,Young Chef's Academy, Midori and Friends and CitySquash, Teacher's Discovery,Three G NY Descendants of Holocaust Survivors,Federation's Unidos Disaster Relief and Recovery, Unicef. PS/IS 163 will be launching more thematic STEAM units of study in this academic school year. Our strengths include scheduling built into the teacher's program that gives opportunities for Teacher Teams to meet one period a week to work collaboratively. This helps our teams look at student data so that they can adjust pedagogical practices and better track student progress. Our school also offers a variety of successful programs which celebrate the multi-talents of our students in non-academic areas such as Dance, Art, Theatre, Glee, Orchestra and Chorus. Our staff is multi-talented where staff is able to provide Professional Development in house that is tailored to meet the needs of our school. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Education and ELL Students. These populations require strong specific scaffolds and small groupings. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Over the last three school years, our school has made growth on the NYS ELA assessments. We have seen a 20 point increase in ELA from 35% to 56% proficient , 15 point increase from 5% to 20% proficient on the subgroup Children With Disabilities , 21 point increase from 24% to 45% proficient on the subgroup Hispanic students, and 21 point increase from 32% to 53% proficient on the subgroup Economically Disadvantaged. We are focusing this year on English Language Learners ELL’s, Building Capacity for Teachers and Parent Outreach. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K163 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 633 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 76 76 18 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 27 23 20 14 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 80.0% % Attendance Rate 76.5% % Reduced Lunch 22.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 34.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 32.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.74 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 55.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 91% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 48 46 10 94.6% 3.8% 18.6% 1.3% 31.3% 0.3% 2 2% 5.5 55.1% 74% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Small group instruction based upon students' needs will be evident in classrooms on a daily basis . Scaffolding with a targeted focus will be utilized to ensure that all students including ELLs and SWD's are provided with appropriate entry points. According to the 2017-2018 School Snapshot the school is currently in good standing and meeting the needs of all subgroups. Tracking will continue to be done in a more comprehensive manner. This is an on-going process. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of strengthening small group instruction and by providing scaffolding,we will see a 3% increase in academic performance on pre and post assessments .(TC Reading benchmark levels and On Demand writing) 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). K-5 teachers will utilize RWP data collection system. Grades 6-8 will receive training in running records. They will receive Professional Development and have inter-visitation amongst colleagues to deepen their understanding of the methodologies. Students Sept 2018-Oct 2019 Teacher teams, Vertical Team,Administration We will also use I-Pads in the upper grades where they will collect data Students Sept 2018 -Oct 2019 Parents will attend PD sessions that will teach parents strategies to assist their children reach their goals and next steps Families Oct 2018-June 2019 Teacher Teams, Vertical Team, Administration Teachers, Parent Coordinator and Administration N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will offer workshops and provide opportunities for parents to visit classrooms to observe best practices on the first Friday of each month. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The following resources will be utilized: Teachers College Curriculum, Inter-visitations and Professional Development. For the inter-visitations and the Professional Development teacher per session and per diem will be utilized. For in house visitations to exemplary classrooms, the schedule will be adjusted for teachers to visit and debrief. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 3  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In late January, the children will be assessed using the TCRWP assessment to see growth from previous benchmark. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) TCRWP running records, pre/post writing samples with CCLS aligned rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? PS/IS 163 believes in supporting student achievement in a safe and risk free environment. All students are supported and challenged throughdifferentiated instruction .Small group instruction will provide ELL students with the specific scaffolds and suport needed to succeed. ELL teachers push in to classrooms on a daily basis to provide small group instruction to ELL students. Self-assessment and peer-assessment/feedback are an integral part of the learning process. Students will be immersed in highly engaging collaborative learning tasks which are student led, such as; debates, trials, STEAM and tiered tasks. Parents are continuously engaged in a culture of learning through classroom inter-visitations, meet and greets, parent engagement on Tuesdays, and are witness to a school environment that communicates high expectations for all. ELL families also attend ELL workshops. All of this work will have a positive impact on our ELL population. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students will have participated in cognitively challenging tasks such as: 2-3 STEAM units, Parent STEAM fair, debates, and tiered-level learning tasks as evidenced by curriculum maps, checklists,rubrics,and final products. There will be a 3% increase in teacher proficiency as evidenced in the area of Danielson Framework component 3d. Students will be provided "Mindfulness" classes two to three times a week in order to strengthen social/emotional awareness. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will formulate and implement learning activities in which students will have the opportunity to engage in cognitively challenged tasks within the curriculum. For example STEAM units, debates, and reflecting critically utilizing mindfulness strategies. ELL and Students with disabilities will participate in said curriculum. Scaffolds and UDL strategies will be provided for all students to access the curriculum. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Teachers Administration Students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Teachers Dates will be provided for open house visitations for the parents to see culminating projects and or performances. Parents Sept. 2018 -June 2019 Administration Teachers Administration N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. By inviting parents into our school on the first Friday of each month our parents will receive relevant strategies to utilize at home. K-5 staff. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule flexibility, planning time, technology, texts and content materials Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 6  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, there will be an increase of levels in component 3C - Engagement as measured by Danielson observations. Students will be able to better understand the feelings that they experience through the use of mindfulness. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. CCLS aligned rubrics and student checklists, and reflection logs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Administration feels that teacher team collaborations for best practices will be strengthened by increasing inter-visitations. Teachers will observe best practices with Literacy Coach Coach during intervisitations. Each teacher team will witness rigorous instruction followed by debriefing structured in proper protocol. Grades 6-8 will meet in grade level teams in order to continue monitoring and aligning the middle school curriculum to the C.C.L.S. Finally, all teachers in grades K-8 will engage in cycles of inquiry to develop and refine teacher pedagogy which will impact positively upon student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will have designed and inserted scaffolds into their written lesson plans through a collaborative effort as measured by Danielson Framework component 1e. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Grades K-5 will receive professional development opportunity on a weekly basis. The school will utilize professional development facilitated by literacy coach and used as a resource to showcase best practices for students, teachers and parents Grades 6-8 will continue meeting on grade level teams in order to adapt and align the middle school curriculum and formulate an action plan to conduct inquiry studies to increase performance Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? K-5 Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Instructional Specialists 6-8 Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Teacher Teams Administration Parents will be invited to visit classrooms to witness best practices in action designed to support students at home Parents Oct 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Parent Coordinator N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will provide workshops designed to inform parents about collaborative classrooms.These workshops will be offered throughout the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will have a common prep where they will collaborate and generate questions. The schedule will provide opportunities for teachers to collaborate. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 9  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will provide feedback/reflections on lab site inter-visitations that will inform administration of any changes or modification to these protocols. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Discussions and debriefing take place during Vertical Team meetings Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In order to maintain teachers' professional learning teachers will:  engage in Teachers College professional curriculum grades K-5  participate in grade level inquiry teams     curriculum mapping receive support from Instructional Specialists in Literacy and Math receive support from push-in ESL specialists receive Advanced Literacy and Next Generation Learning Standards training Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In the 2018-2019 academic school year, in order to support our students to be college and career ready we are continuing weekly teacher professional development k-5 with our Literacy Coach in order to increase student achievement. Faculty will also receive professional development from administration and ELL specialists. By June 2019, there will be a 3% increase on pre and post assessments in grades K-8. By June 2019, all classroom teachers will be trained in Advanced Literacy and Next Generation Learning standards. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will receive Professional Development and inter- visitation opportunities to deepen their understanding of the methodologies Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Staff Developers, Administration Implement best practices in all classrooms by utilizing key teachers in these research based strategies, lead teachers will provide Professional Development and cycles of inter-visitation Teachers Sept 2018-June2019 Instructional Specialists Administration Parent Workshops will be conducted showing the structures and the strategies utillized in best practices and in ELL strategies. Parents Sept 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, Literacy Coach Teachers will be trained in Advanced Literacy and Next Generation Learning Standards Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Administration ESL Coordinator Administration Literacy Coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. By inviting parents into our school on the first Friday of each month our parents will receive relevant strategies to utilize at home. K-5 staff.Parents will be invited to Title III meetings,SLT meetings, and PTA meetings to promote parent leadership and engagement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. TCRWP assessments, on-demand writing, CCLS writing rubrics and checklists Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, Administration will collect student work such as unit assessments and student writing to monitor achievement. Parent reflections will be collected after parent workshops to measure effectiveness. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent reflections, TCRWP assessments, pre-post writing on-demand pieces Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS/IS 163 believes the parent component is an important part of our learning community and needed to ensure student success. In order to increase parent outreach the following will occur:  To increase opportunities for parents to participate in their child's classrooms parents will be invited to attend First Fridays in grades K-5. Parents receive the chance to witness instruction on the first Friday of each month. Facilitated parent/teacher/student conferences on Tuesdays. This will allow the opportunity to create effective partnerships and increase communication.   P.T.A meetings will be held on Tuesdays from 2.40 until 3:15 in order to increase participation  E-Chalk and End Grade  Meet and Greet   Ongoing teacher/parent workshops  Instructional Specialist Workshops STEAM Fair Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 20% of parents will have participated in workshops/First Fridays/meet and greets as evidenced by attendance and feedback forms. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Academic and extra-curricular workshops will be provided for the parent community in Math, ELA, Technology and the arts. Skills and strategies to enhance student learning will be the focus. Parents In addition to the above workshops, parents will have an opportunity to attend workshops which support the students with disabilities and ELL communities. Parents In order to provide families with multiple opportunities to attend the workshops will be offered during the school day, after school and in the evenings. Parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Sept. 2018-June 2019 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administration Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Administration Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Administration N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Italian Federation, Midori and Friends Arista Society, STEAM, The Urban Barcoding Project, Rockefeller University, El Museo del Barrio, Ballet Hispanico, City Growers, American Museum of Natural History,Hispanic Society of America, , Midori and Friends and CitySquash, Teacher's Discovery,Three G NY Descendants of Holocaust Survivors,Federation's Unidos Disaster Relief and Recovery, Unicef. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Prepared handouts on topic, reflection form, survey for topics to be presented, teacher availability Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 5  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Percentage of parents attending workshops at this point. Family outreach if attendance is low. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets and reflection forms Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 2nd grade and high level 2 from State Exam based on scale score (grades 4-8) 2nd grade and high level 2 from State Exam based on scale score (grades 4-8) N/A N/A Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) NY Ready, Teacher's College Curriculum Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) small group during school day NY Ready small group during school day N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A as needed Social services individual during school day Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 7  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. No children in temporary housing N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 8  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 9  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● We have new staff that will receive mentoring instruction with Highly Qualified Teachers. ● 20K163 currently employs a full time a Literacy and Math Coach. ● Lead Teachers from all content areas were carefully selected to attend network sponsored professional development and are responsible for turn-keying training in-house. ● The Administration provides teachers with effective feedback during short frequent cycles of observation using Danielson’s Framework. ● Approximately 97% of teaching staff has more than three years teaching experience. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The teachers have an extra professional development prep period where they design STEAM units throughout the content areas. Every Monday faculty meets during the extended professional development period to discuss and design inquiry. The paraprofessionals are invited to professional development. We have also introduced My Library into the school to create a better relationship between the NY public libraries and the school. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 0  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers will utilize components of the TCRWP including running records to assess students and to inform instruction. This will be done periodically and measured during the appropriate benchmark. All grades K-8 will assess writing on demand pieces with CCLS aligned rubrics to plan for instruction. Teachers will be able to assess and plan during their common prep during the school year. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 445,711 X 1 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5C and 5D  Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local 63,966 19,150 0 4,148,531 X 5A, 5C and 5D 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 2  effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 3  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program which will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S./I.S 163, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS/IS 163 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 4  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 5  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/IS 163, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 6  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 7  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 8  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 9  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 0 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm 2. 3. Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: Bath Beach School This school is (check one): DBN: 20K163 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: The more immersion in the English language the more likely students are to become proficient in English. Supplementary instruction in English for our ELLs will move students from one performance level to a higher one. Examples of this include Expanding level on the NYSESLAT to Commanding level on the NYSESLAT and Performance Level 2 on the ELA to Performance LEVEL 3 on the ELA. Each 90 minute session will focus on vocabulary development by use of content area readings in the arts, science, and social studies. STEM will be addressed through the use of SMARTBOARD activities that address math vocabulary as well as the language of word problems. Students will be grouped according to language proficiency and grade levels. CCLS as well as other content area instruction can be more focused because of this arrangement. Content reading, STEM and vocabulary development will be the focus of the instruction from November through mid-March and preparation for the NYSESLAT will occur from mid-March through mid-April. Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: The following subgroups will be served by the Title III program: 1. Former ELLs that scored a Performance Level of 1 or 2 on the 2017 NY State ELA presently in in grades 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 including Students with Disabilities. 2. Expanding level ELLs as determined by the 2017 NYSESLAT, or the NYSITELL presently in grades 1 to 8 including Students with Disabilities. 3. Transitioning, Emerging and Entering ELLs as determined by the 2017 NYSESLAT, or the NYSITELL presently in grades 1 to 8 including Students with Disabilities. Schedule and Duration: There are seven distinct groups for the Title III after school program Grades 2 -8 and 2 distinct groups for the Title III after school program Grade 1. Group A- Grade 2 All levels. Meets Wed. and Thurs. 2:45 to 4:15 November 29, 2017 through April 26, 2018 36: ninety minute sessions. ** Certified ESL teacher will meet with Group A on Wed., 2:45 to 3:30. Group B- Grade 3, 4, 5 Transitioning and Expanding ELLs. November 29, 2017 through April 26, 2018 36: ninety minute sessions. ** Certified ESL teacher will meet with Group B and Group C on Wed., 3:30 to 4:15. Group C- Grades 3, 4 and 5 , Entering and Emerging level ELLs. Meets Wed. and Thurs., 2:45 to 4:15, November 29, 2017 through April 26, 2018 36: ninety minute sessions. ** Certified ESL teacher will meet with Group C and Group B on Wed., 3:30 to 4:15. 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Group D- Grades 5, 6, 7 Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding level ELLs. Meets Wed. and Thurs. November 29, 2017 through April 26, 2017 36: ninety minute sessions. **Certified ESL teacher will meet with Group D and Group E on Thurs. 2:45 to3:30. Group E - Grades 6, 7, 8 entering, and emerging, ELLS. Meets Wed. and Thurs.2:45 to 4:15, November 16, 2016 to April 27, 2017. 40 ninety minute sessions. **Certified ESL teacher will meet with Group E and Group D on Thurs., 2:45 to 3:30. Group F - Grades 3, 4, 5 Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding. Meets Wed. and Thurs. 2:45 to 4:15, November 29, 2017 through April 26, 2017 36: ninety minute sessions. ** Certified ESL teacher will meet with this group on Thurs., 3:30 to 4:15. Academic Support from Certified ESL Teacher Title III Afterschool Program Time WEDNESDAY THURSDAY 2:45 – 3:30 Group A Groups D and E 3:30 – 4:15 Groups B and C Group F Language of Instruction: English # and types of certified teachers: 1 certified ESL teacher, 5 content area teachers (1 Math, 1 Foreign Language [Spanish], 1 Middle School ELA, 2 Common Branch) for the grades 2 -8 program. Foreign Language teacher will provide support in the Native Language Arts for her group that includes students who speak Spanish. 1 certified ESL teacher (same as one above) and 1 common branches (one of the CB teachers from 2 -8 program) teacher for the Grade 1 program. **Supervisor on site will be the school principal. Principal will also be supervising other afterschool programs and will not be paid from Title III funds. Types of materials: Discussions for Learning Vocabulary Kits, Steck Vaughn Focus on Science, Oxford Picture Dictionary for the Content Areas, NYSESLAT Review books, trade books, Scott Foresman series, assorted teacher and internet materials aligned to the Common Core Standards, and Engage NY. ALL materials are already in our building and will be used exclusively for the Title III afterschool program. ***ESL TEACHER WILL CO-PLAN CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENTS WITH ALL TEACHERS IN THE TITLE III PROGRAM. This will be done on a weekly basis. ***ESL teacher will have a group of Newcomers from grades 3, 4, 5. ESL teacher will instruct these children for 45 minutes weekly of the after school sessions. For 135 minutes weekly the ESL teacher will work with one of the other 5 groups. At this time, the teacher whose class is being instructed by the ESL teacher will work with the ESL teacher's group of Newcomers. 3  rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: Rationale: Teachers and staff who understand the groups of ELL students they are instructing can better address the academic needs of those students. Ongoing and sufficiently intense training will be provided to all teachers to ensure academic success for ELLs. **Professional development will be a NO cost to Title III program. Using the Danielson Framework, administrators will observe differentiated instruction for ELLs in a variety of settings. This positive effect for our ELLs will be long lasting and measurable through performance on standardized testing as well as teacher developed assessments. **Teachers to receive training: Title III teachers 1 ENL teacher, 6 content area teachers, 1 common branch teachers. Schedule and Duration: Monthly meetings will be scheduled December through April for all 8 teachers. Topics to be covered: language acquisition, NYSESLAT preparation, reading strategies for fluency and comprehension, writing strategies for greater proficiency. Name of provider: Vincenzo Rosignano, ENL Teacher **All teachers, including Special Education, in the school will attend meetings 3 times per year (January, March, and April) to help them work with the ELLs in their classroom. Topics to be covered: Helping ELLs to access content, writing needs and increasing the complexity of text to meet CCLS. Name of provider: Vincenzo Rosignano Head ENL Teacher **Study groups will be organized by grade level for classroom teachers. These groups will meet 3 times per year (December, February, and April) to review language acquisition theories, content reading area strategies and best practices. Meetings will be conducted during our Monday, 2:40 to 4:00 pm mandated professional development time as per collective bargaining agreement. **ENL Coordinator will share offerings of Office of English Language Learners for professional development. Principal is receptive to allowing teachers to attend the offered sessions during the school day and interested teachers can enroll for these sessions. **ENL Coordinator, who will be working in the Title III program, will receive ongoing PD through Brooklyn South ENL component and other opportunities from the Office of English Language Learners. These PD sessions will be at different times than the Title III program. **Provider of PD at PS/IS 163 will maintain an agenda and attendance for all PD sessions. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered 4  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities · · name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities ELA, Reading-Scott Buchanan, Assistant Principal NYSESLAT- Vincenzo Rosignano , ESL Teacher Homework and accessing information - Valerie Ponzo, Parent Coordinator Helping Your Child on the NYSESLAT and Other State Tests.&nbsp; March Reading With Your Child.&nbsp; February Helping Your Child with Homework. December Accessing Information about Your Child's School and Education. November Begin description here: Rationale: Students, whose parents are fully informed of and involved in their children's school culture, are more likely to be academically on target. Parents who become proficient in the English language can better participate in their children's education as well as provide academic assistance to their children. Based on a needs assessment conducted last spring and parental participation at previous parent meetings, the following topics will be discussed: state Testing, reading to your children, helping your child with homework, and how to get information on your child's school and education. Schedule and Duration: 4 Workshops: · · · · Names of Providers: · · · **Parents of ELLs will be afforded the opportunity to engage with the school community by attending all PTA meetings, schoolwide meetings, parent-teacher conferences, and by invitation opportunity during the mandated 2:40 to 3:55 parental involvement meetings on Tuesdays. How parents will be notified: Notices in English, Spanish, Chinese, Arabic, Urdu, and Russian will be posted via flyers posted in and around the school, flyers sent home. PTA newsletters, the Electronic and Announcement Board. At school meetings held during the school day, bilingual staff are designated by the principal to attend and translate orally or in writing. If meeting are after or before regular school hours, bilingual staff will be encourage to attend and translate. Per session payment will be offered for these activities. How parents will be notified: Notices will be posted via flyers posted in and around the school, flyers sent home, PTA newsletters, Electronic Announcement Board. Parents will be notified in their preferred language of communication. This is done by utilizing the Dept. of Education's Translation Service. At school meeting held during the school day, bilingual staff are designated by the principal to attend and translate orally or in writing. If meetings are after or before regular school hours, bilingual staff are encouraged to attend and translate. We will use the money in our Translation Services fund to facilitate this. 5 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 20 School Name The Bath Beach School Borough Brooklyn School Number 163 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jessica Riccio Coach Joan Gilchrist ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Vincenzo Rosignano Teacher/Subject Area Seth Pechter, Grade 6 Teacher/Subject Area Mei Gong, ENL/ESL Related-Service Provider Mona Solomon (Speech) Superintendent Karina Costantino Assistant Principal John Scott Buchanan Coach April Brandwien School Counselor Orsola Bonilla Parent Joyce Mortin Parent Coordinator Valerie Ponzo Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 3 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 7  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 637 Total number of ELLs 151 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 23.70% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools used to assess the early literacy skills of ELLs at PS/IS 163 include the following: • TCRWP • Running Records • Teacher Made Assessments • NYSESLAT/NYSITELL • ELL Periodic Assessment These assessment tools provide data about the fluency level and comprehension level of ELLs. English language proficiency levels are also provided for grouping ELLs into appropriate groups for ESL. Data from these formal and informal assessments help to place children in appropriate instructional groups. They assess the students on an on-going basis, the results show the 8  ELLs different reading levels. We also incorporate the ELL Baseline throughout the year for teachers to see the areas our ELL students showed growth and what they need to improve in. Based on these assessments the data indicates a need for intense reading instruction for the ELLs. The ENL teacher collaborates with the classroom teachers for consistency of instruction and to ensure that these students will meet the learning standards and read on grade level. She delivers reading instruction with emphasis on alphabet recognition and phonics. This enables the ELLs to reinforce the language that is taught during the day. However, during the year, the ENL teacher uses authentic assessment such as Daily Observations, checklists, rubrics, exit slips, and Performance Assessments. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The structures we have in place to help support this effort are that teachers make sure that our students are assessed daily through a variety of assessments. This will allow the teacher to recognise what the students excel in and what they need help in. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our ELLs is evaluated by using the NYSESLAT. The results of this test help us to see the progress made. Success of programs for ELLs are evaluated by an examination of scores on the NYSESLAT, and the Periodic Assessments. For the 2015 NYSESLAT 37 student attained Commanding level out of 122 who took the test. Many of these students were already in the advanced or intermediate levels based on the 2014 NYSESLAT. Performance of ELLs on the ELA and State Math tests 2015 did not indicate that school was in need of improvement. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teachers meet once a week for inquiry to discuss various students. They discuss the students needs and different teaching methodologies and strategies to help move the student forward. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] PS/IS implements RTI by carefully assessing the needs of our ELLs and more specifically students who have been referred to the AIS/PPT committee. Using guidelines of the RTI Guide for ELLs, several factors are taken into consideration before a referral is initiated. Consideration is given to the child’s cultural, linguistic, socioeconomic, educational and experiential background. Multiple assessments are used, such as MOSL, teacher made tests, and standardized assessments. Discussion focuses on what contexts this student is not succeeding and comparison is made with the success of monolingual peers. PS/IS 163 uses data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention framework by providing Extended Day groups that are only ELLs and can address the particular need of this group. ELL Extended Day groups work on vocabulary development, usage, and writing skills across all proficiency levels at all grades including SWDs. The Title III program also utilizes the RTI framework by providing ELLs grades 1 to 8 with additional academic opportunities in an afterschool setting. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSITELL data and NYSESLAT data indicate that there are 59 students who tested in the Expanding level; 15 in the Emerging level; 15 in the Transitioning level and 17 in the Entering level. Therefore, most of our ELLs will receive 180 minutes a week of ESL services. Students at the Entering proficiency level on the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT, on all grades, will receive ESL instruction with a primary focus on listening and speaking. Reading and writing will be integrated.. • Students at the Emerging and Transitioning levels on the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT, on all grades, will receive ESL instruction with a focus on reading. Fluency, literal and inferential comprehension, as well as vocabulary development, will be included. Writing will be incorporated, utilizing guided and independent writing activities to foster reading mastery. • Students at the Expanding level on the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT, on all grades, will receive ESL instruction with a focus on writing. Guided and independent writing will be part of daily activities. Students will work toward meeting NYS ELA Common 9  Core Standards in all categories of writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The structured we have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to our ENL program weekly teacher team meetings where an ENL teacher is present. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. -Beginner/Entering students receive 360 minutes a week of ENL. 360 minutes are standalone ENL. -Low Intermediate/ Emerging students receive 360 minutes a week of ENL. 180 minutes are standalone ENL, 180 minutes are integrated ENL. -Intermediate/Transitioning students receive 180 minutes a week of ENL. 90 minutes are standalone ENL, 90 minutes are integrated ENL. -Advanced/ Expanding students receive 180 minutes a week of ENL. 180 minutes are integrated ENL. -Proficient/ Commanding students receive 90 minutes a week of ENL. 90 minutes are integrated ELA or Content area. Students are grouped by language proficiency and by grade level. Students also travel with each other from class to class at the ENL teacher pushes in with the content teacher for a double block period, two days a week. These teachers have a chance to plan together and work on the best strategies for there students. As for the Pull-out method the ELLs are picked-up from the classroom and provided differentiated ENL instruction according to grade and English proficiency level. The grouping is based on grade and proficiency level, i.e. students in Kindergarten [Entering and Emerging] together, grades one and two (E/EM); grades three and four (E/EM), and/or grade 4/5 (E/EM. Transitioning and Expanding ELLs are also grouped by grade and English proficiency level. b. TBE program. If applicable. There is no TBE program at PS/IS 163. c. DL program. If applicable. There is no DL program at PS/IS 163. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Based on NYSESLAT results, students receive the mandated periods for Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding This results in hiring of the appropriate number of ESL teachers to fulfill requirements of instruction and to ensure the right amount of services are being provided to each student on a weekly basis. All entering and emerging 3rd, 4th, and 5th grade students are pulled-out for their mandated ESL instructional minutes. The 1st and 2nd grade entering and emerging are also grouped and pulled out for the mandated instructional time. In addition, the ESL teacher will push-in for all students from grades K-5. Scheduling is very crucial. It has to be done in collaboration with other ELL service providers.The 0  ENL teacher collaborates with these service providers such as Speech teacher, OT/PT, guidance & counseling provider, and SETSS to make sure that schedule is arranged to avoid conflict with ENL. This is done to ensure that mandated number of minutes are provided. Entering and Emerging ELLs are provided 2 units of of study per week (360 minutes) of ENL instruction and 1 unit of study per week (180 minutes) for Transitioning and Expanding ELLs. Those ELLs who exited out of NYSESLAT are still included in the schedule of services provided as they will continue to be provided with 90 minutes/week of instruction for two years even if they achieve commanding level of proficiency. HLA is used when needed to help explain Content area. This is done though peers, teachers, other adults and translation programs. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Planning and preparation is expected between the classroom teacher and the Freestanding ENL program teachers. Research shows that the classroom environment provides limited opportunities for ELLs to produce oral language, one of the primary missions of our Freestanding ENL program is for our students to be given ample opportunities to produce oral language through activities and group work using the push-in or pull-out model. The school’s ENL program is designed to develop both the social and academic development of ELLs. Basic interpersonal communication skills of ELLs in English are developed through cooperative learning approach in pair or in small group. During push-in, the ENL teacher sits and work with the group of ELLs to reinforce the lesson using ENL methodologies. Since the school uses the Tv the ENL teacher works in collaboration with the classroom teachers of ELLs through conversations and meetings to assist the students in reading, writing and language development. The ENL teacher provides conference notes to classroom teachers to reinforce and align language, literacy and Math instruction that fosters academic language development and to help students meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teacher delivers 100% English in providing differentiated instruction using TPR, hands-on activities and exposing them to speaking and listening activities during the read-alouds, think alouds, phonics, and language patterns. The ENL teacher uses sheltered instruction- i.e. using English language instruction in teaching the content area topics more comprehensible to students with limited vocabularies. This includes using visuals, demonstrations and collaborative learning activities for the ELLs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year through the use of translated material and peers. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE), are provided with a very supportive environment that responds to their immediate social, cultural and linguistic needs. They are immersed in the English language. To help the students acclimate to their new environment, a buddy system is utilized to assist ENL and SIFE students with the adjustment of a new school and new culture, adjusting to their classrooms' rituals, routines and educational activities. Our students are provided academic intervention services after school and on Saturdays through enrichment classes to accelerate academic achievement. ELLs who h scored on the entering and emerging level will continue to receive 360 minutes of ESL services for , and 180 minutes for transitioning and expanding level students. The aforementioned will continue to receive services, until they are proficient on the NYSESLAT. Strategies that will be provided with lessons that offer, pictures, diagrams, and demonstrations. The ESL teacher provides differentiated instruction using Total Physical Response (TPR) methodologies, hands on activities and Language Experience Approach methodologies (i.e. playing and discussing books on tape, interactive learning on computers using Headsprout and Starfall. In addition, teacher will expose them to speaking and listening during the read-alouds. Phonics and language pattern teaching will also be employed with our ELLs. English Language Learners, with 4 to 6 years, will be offered intensive academic intervention so as to ensure intensified literacy and language development. They will receive explicit instruction in the five components of reading; phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary and comprehension 1  instruction will be provided. The ENL teacher informs the administration about the former ELLs and makes sure that these ELLs who tested out of NYSESLAT will continue receiving additional academic support outside the classroom for 90 min per week (e.g. small group instruction other than ENL) while they continue to transition themselves into the regular mainstream class. Formers ELLs who are in the testing grades will continue to have testing accommodations, i.e. separate location and extended time and a half for two years after they test out, according to the CR Part 154-2. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies and grade level materials that teachers of ELL-SWDs use that provides access to academic content and accelerates English language development include the following instructional strategies: • Create assessments that give students an opportunity to present in English after they have an opportunity to practice in pairs or small groups. • Introduce more academic skills, such as brainstorming, prioritizing, categorization, summarizing and compare and contrast. • During silent reading circle words that they don’t know and write down what they think the word means. Results will be checked as a class. It is the administration vision that all students at any grade level should be using the same materials that have to be modified. Our SETTS teacher, ICT teachers, and 12-1-1 teachers monitor all IEPs to make sure ELL-SWDs are receiving all recommended services, including ENL, OT, PT, Speech and any other service. Our ESL Coordinator schedules our ELL-SWDs for ENL classes according to proficiency and grade level. Advanced/Commanding students receiving 180 minutes per week, and Intermediate/Transitioning students receiving 180 minutes per week. Intermediate/ Emerging students receiving 360 minutes per week. Beginner/Entering students receive 360 minutes perweek. In the past when we have had ELL-SWDs with mandated bilingual services, those students were serviced in a 12-1-1 class with an alternative placement bilingual paraprofessional. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable diverse ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment by first being aware of the IEP goals, and then modifying curricular materials on that grade level. This would include scaffolding , chunking and reteaching. ELL-SWDs are grouped with non-disabled ELLs where appropriate. The ENL Coordinator groups ELL-SWDs according to language proficiency as attained on the NYSESLAT or NYSITELL. In the ESL program we do not have any group that is solely ELL-SWDs. PS/ IS 163 has ICT classes on grades Kindergarten, 1, 2 , 3, 6and 8. Those classes enroll the ELL-SWDs for the appropriate grades. This allows for greater integration of ELL-SWDs with non-disabled peers. Instructional strategies and grade level materials that teachers of ELL-SWDs use that provides access to academic content and accelerates English language development include the following instructional strategies: As well, as having the opportunity of being able to pull the student out of the classroom to give more one-to-one or small group support. Schedules for grade meetings to design lessons that address the needs of ELLs –SWDs. They are provided focused instruction in phonics and small group guided reading and writing. Aside from the services stipulated in theIEP, the school IEP teacher provides SETSS to these students. The IEP teacher performs small group instruction with designated ELL-SWDs and the lowest one-third of the school population while the classroom teacher provides instruction with the regular class. In addition to the 360 or 180 mandated number of minutes provided by the ENL teacher, the SETSS provider provides 60 minutes of academic instruction twice a week. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 2  ELLs have been distinctly grouped for our AIS Program. These groups are organized based on grade and language ability. These targeted intervention programs are at the appropriate levels to help students achieve academic competencies in ELA and the content areas. Former English Language Learners are also grouped for our AIS Program. These groups focus on maintaining language proficiency to facilitate continued success on NYS testing. Utilizing the Teacher’s College Writing Program, classroom teachers differentiate instruction for ELLs. This improved focus on the distinct language needs of ELLs will include listening and speaking activities as initial activities for writing. PS/IS 163 has targeted interventions for math in AIS groups during the school day for grades 3 to 8. There are also targeted interventions for math in an after school program that children attend once or twice a week. There are 3 classes after school that are targeted for fundamental math skills for students who have achieve PL 1 on the State Math. Differentiated instruction and assignments are utilized by teachers in their social studies and science lessons. These include many of the strategies described in # 8 of this section. Data utilized to target instruction for ELLs includes Performance Level on the ELA and Math tests, MOSLs, teacher tests and observations. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our ENL program will continue as a stand alone and integrated program in alignment with the vision of the administration and its success on the NYSESLAT. ENL teachers will continue to use a mix of materials and methods that parallel the expected performance tasks of the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL teachers will work on improving the accessibility of texts for our ELLs. ELLs in grades K-2 score higher in listening and speaking. Reading and Writing are weak as these students are in the early literacy stage. ELLs in grades 3 – 6 score higher in Speaking, and Reading. Writing and Listening are weak areas for these grades. ELLs in grades 7 – 8 score higher in Speaking and Reading. Writing and Listening are weak areas for these grades. Beginning reading skills, such as decoding, are generally well developed for all performance levels. Newcomers often have trouble with this skill, especially if they are from countries where there is a different alphabet/ reading system. Writing skills are generally weak for all ELLs across all proficiency levels. We will provide our ELL students with Native Language/English dictionaries on a daily basis. In addition, ongoing, in-house, professional development, to infuse English Language instruction with classroom strategies to aid ELL students in learning English at an accelerated rate. Every teacher should attend professional development on language acquisition theory and vocabulary development and oral language development opportunities within each unit/lesson. Strategies on ELL language development will become part of all teacher team meetings in content areas and on all grade levels. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There are no programs or services for ELLs that will be discontinued at this point. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. These include, but are not limited to, AIS, Enrichment Cluster, Extended Day, Title III, and all after school programs. School programs during the school day include AIS, Enrichment Clusters, Music, Art, Dance classes. Programming for AIS is based on scores ELLs received in ELA and State Math. All students are included in the Enrichment Clusters that are held every Tuesday afternoon. The principal includes all students including ELLs in her programming of music , art, and dance. All students are invited to participate in extracurricular activities. Participation of ELLs in afterschool theater, music and art programs is significant and genuine. They are represented equally as non-disabled students. Announcements, letters, and flyers are the way opportunities to participate in afterschool programs are made known. Translations are often provided in writing or via telephone where needed. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All ELLs in our school are part of the general education classroom, with the exception of our self contained Special Education classrooms with ELLs. As a result, all ELL students have the same access to all materials and technology as any other student in 3  our school, including our ELL students who are in Special Education classes. Every classroom in our school has technology, including SMART boards and computers. Instructional materials used in the ENL program are not exclusive. These resources are utilized to employ parts of the Common Core Learning Standards. Instruction is based on the standards rather than a commercial program. Some of the commercial materials are listed below. Internet sites for ENL as well as other sources on the DOE website are utilized when needed to instruct a particular part of the CCLS. • Trade books arranged according to genre and level for independent reading. • Santillana Intensive English Program. • DLM Photo Library • Scott Foresman levels 1-5 • Scott Foresman Parade levels 1-2 • Addison Wesley levels A, B, C and D • Addison Wesley Kids Levels A, B, C • Pearson Education Newcomer Phonics • Sesame Street Open Sesame Program including picture cards • Attanasio and Associates Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT (K TO 8) • SRA Photo Library • Rigby On the Way to English Grades 1 to 5 • Teacher developed materials and assessments. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered in our ESL program directly through translation, availability of trade books in native languages, peer assistance, bilingual dictionaries, and internet translation services. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services and resources correspond to ELL’s ages and grade levels. This is accomplished by grouping all ELLs for ESL according to language proficiency. Materials are age appropriate. Most importantly, materials and instruction align with the CCLS. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school is not a co-located school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At the beginning of the school year, the school has a "Meet the Teacher Night" , two weeks within the beginning of the school year for parents and teachers to get to know one and another. The administration and staff welcome the students and families to the school. Parents, staff and students talk about the upcoming activities for the school year with refreshments served. They will be given a tour throughout the school, highlighting the ENL room, computer room, and library. In addition, throughout the evening, parents are shown all the programs that ELLs are exposed to during the school day . Parents and students will be given the opportunity to explore these programs in the computer room. Assessments and ELL requirements will be discussed, as well as answering any questions and concerns the parents might have. These groups are conducted by ENL teachers. There is also a newcomers program in the Title III After school program. Newcomers also have an opportunity to participate in summer school programs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish for grades 6 to 8. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 4  In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? There are no dual language programs at PS/IS 163. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teachers attend staff developments throughout the year. Currently we are registered for two workshops: (1)Devleoping Academic Language for English Language Learners in Mathematics, (2) CR Part 154. Our PLC committee facilitate professional learning opportunities on a weekly bases for all teachers of ELL students and will work hand-in-hand with the ENL teachers to monitor the ENL program. The PLC committee are constantly learning new innovative ways and research-based instructional strategies that the ENL teachers use with rigorous instruction to meet the Common Core Learning Standards and Danielson's Framework. Some of the workshops already held incorporate the following domains from the the Danielson Rubric: (1e)Designing Coherent Instruction, (3b) Using Question and Discussion Techniques. Future workshops will cover and discuss these next domains (3c) Engaging Students in Learning, (3d) Using Assessment in Instruction, (4c) Communicating with Families, and (1f) Designing Student Assessment. Professional development will be done several times a year , for the entire school year, for teachers in order to help them better understand how to bolster the work with ELLs. The school provides professional development to school staff including assistant principals, guidance counselors, speech teacher, secretaries, parents' coordinator and all classroom teachers especially those with ELLs. These PD's are focused on Common Core Standards & Danielson's Framework, data-driven instruction and best practices for teaching ELLs in the regular classroom. School-based PD’s are usually provided every Mondays. The goal is to arm the classroom teachers with the tools and strategies that they will need to serve the English Language Learner population in their respective classrooms. The ENL teacher shares with classroom teachers ENL strategies they could use in the class for ELLs. This will give the teachers some support in terms of differentiated activities they could use that’s appropriate for the ELLs proficiency level in the classroom. The school distributes survey or questionnaires to staff to determine what professional developments they need in terms of best practices, data analysis, curriculum standards and instruction. PD Calendar for the current school year is made on a monthly basis: It started in September and will continue throughout the school year. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. To meet the required professional development of teachers as per CR Part 154.1 and 154.2 adopted regulation, school has to provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English Language Learners. Teachers are given the opportunity to attend PDs provided by the district and from the Office of English Language Learners or school-based especially PDs that address the Common Core Standards & Danielson's Framework, data-driven instruction and best practices. The school has to ensure that 15% of PD hours are provided to all teachers and 50% for Bilingual Education / ENL teachers receive PD hours that are specific to the needs of ELLs, co-teaching strategies, and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. To further enhance effective instruction, the ENL teachers share with classroom teachers the ENL instructional and/or scaffolding strategies that they've learned in their PDs. This will give the classroom teachers the support they need in teaching ELLs in terms of differentiated activities appropriate to the proficiency level of the ELLs in their classroom. ENL Teacher's records of agendas and attendance to the PDs are filed and kept in the school PD binder for record keeping, as well as in the ENL Binder. 5  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parental involvement is integral to the successful functioning of our school. PS/IS 163 has traditionally made it a practice to inform parents of all educational and social activities. Notices are sent home in a timely manner and are translated. These translated notices help to include parents of ELLs and FELLs in as many activities as possible. The ENL program will provide parents and guardians of ELLs with the opportunity to attend a variety of family literacy and math workshops, so they can better assist in the education and learning of their children at home. All written information and/or invitation letters, flyers are sent home to parents based on their preferred language, and current staff are used for translation as well. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our Title III and Translation Services program will include a parent component. Adult ENL classes will be held two times per week to help parents become more effective and involved in their children’s education. Lessons will include an integrated approach that utilizes listening, speaking, reading and writing of English. The Grammar Sense series as well as teacher developed materials will be used for this program. One of our fully licensed ENL teachers will conduct these classes after school two afternoons per week.Parents of ELLs, like all of our student’s parents, are invited to participate in PTA activities, career day presentations, assembly programs, field day activities, school performances, and classroom visitations. Notices of these activities are often provided with translations in Chinese, Spanish, Arabic and Urdu. During the activities bilingual personnel are utilized to translate or parents bring their own friend or family member who can adequately translate what is needed. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jessica Riccio, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Bath Beach School School DBN: 20K163 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jessica Riccio Title Principal John Scott Buchanan Assistant Principal Valerie Ponzo Parent Coordinator Vincenzo Rosignano ENL/Bilingual Teacher Joyce Mortin Parent Mei Gong, ENL Teacher/Subject Area Seth Pechter, 6 TH Gr/Data Teacher/Subject Area April Brandwien Joan Gilchrist Coach Coach Orsola Bonilla School Counselor Karina Costantino Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/29/17 9/29/17 9/29/17 9/29/17 9/29/17 9/29/17 9/29/17 9/29/17 9/29/17 9/29/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 8  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 20K163 School Name: BATH BEACH SCHOOL Superintendent: K. Costantino The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Vincenzo Rosignano ENL Coordinator No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S./ I.S. 163 has the following processes in place to assess the written and oral interpretation needs of parents: 1. Notation of parents' request on page 2 of the Home Language Information Survey into ATS. 2. Referencing the RAPL report in ATS. 3. NYCDOE survey of language of communication sent home for parents to answer. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 9  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ALBANIAN ARABIC BENGALI (BANGLA IN BANGLADESH) CHAM CHINESE ANY CANTONESE MANDARIN ENGLISH POLISH RUSSIAN SPANISH URDU UKRAINIAN 2 19 1 1 128 0 0 473 7 12 198 16 1 0.23 2.21 0.12 0.12 14.92 0 0 55.13 0.82 1.4 23.08 1.86 0.12 2 18 1 1 118 6 6 471 7 13 198 15 2 0.23 2.1 0.12 0.12 13.75 0.7 0.7 54.9 0.82 1.52 23.08 1.75 0.23 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families 1. September 2. September- June 3. September, November, March, and May plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Written translation services will be provided to parents who need them by utilizing the services of the 1. Welcome Letter 2. Monthly Calendar 3. Notice of Parent Teacher Conferences 4. Notice of NYS test dates (September, and reminder in March) 0  5. Field Day Notice (May) 6. Discipline Code, Grading Policy, and Homework Policy (October) 7. High School Admission Notices (October, and when needed) 8. Field Trip Notices (as needed) 4. September and March 5. May 6. October 7. October and when needed 8. When needed NYC DOE Translation Services Unit. Written documents in need of translation are sent to Translations, who will then send them back to the school. Turn around time for this can be up to 2 weeks. The required number of copies will be made for needed languages and sent home to parents. Translations from the Unit will usually be done in Spanish, Chinese, Russian, Urdu, and Arabic. These are the languages available through the Unit for our school. For languages other than those stated, we attach a note that says in 12 languages "The attached notice is important and must be translated." Informal notes are translated and hand written by staff who can write 1  in the parents' preferred language of communication. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school 1. Parent Teacher Conferences 2. Testing meeting 3. High School information Meeting 1. September, November, March and May 2. March 3. October, December, and February plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Oral translations will be provided in languages in which a staff member is fluent. These translations are usually on the spot without prior notice to staff. Another source we have used and will continue to use is the telephone translations offered by NYC DOE Translations Unit. Other sources of translations, especially in languages that are not as prevalent, are friends of families, their neighbors or parents of other 2  students in school. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Parents are called using the translation unit and school staff who can speak the child's home language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff advised at PD on Mondays in September of all available translation services and given name of Language Access Coordinator, who can assist with individual issues. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Welcome Poster prominently displayed in school lobby. Parent's Bill of Rights distributed each fall. Parent's Guide to Language Access available to parents through the LAC. Language ID Guide laminated and available at security desk and the main office for all parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent survey will be distributed in the spring to ascertain that all language groups have received adequate information about their child's school. Parents are also encouraged to come to school to speak to the Parent Coordinator and staff members whenever they have questions or concerns. 3 
