 20K170 School Name: RALPH A. FABRIZIO SCHOOL Principal: ZHEN (TONY) WU   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 170 The Ralph A. Fabrizio School 20K170 School Number (DBN): 332000010170 K-5 619 72nd StreetBrooklyn NY 11209 718-491-8400 Phone Number: 718-491-8405 Fax: Zhen(Tony) Wu zwu@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Zhen(Tony) Wu Monique Jutt Vanessa Lopez Lynne Yabroudi Angela Nguyen N/A pending District Information Geographical District: 20 Superintendent’s Office Address: Karina Costantino Superintendent: 415 89 th Street Room 401 Brooklyn, NY 11209 kcostan@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-759-4908 Phone Number: 718-759-4842 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn South Mauriciere de Govia FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89 th Street Brooklyn mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-923-5171 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Zhen (Tony) Wu Monique Jutt ZainebAlmontajer Elena Gallo Angela Nguyen N/A N/A Pending Lynne Yabroudi Melanie Fonollosa Trianthe Sialakas *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ SLT Chairperson, UFT Member/ Teacher, UFT Member/ Teacher, UFT   Aida Ahmad KaitlynRyan Liz Hidalgo Sandra Medina Yun Qiu Lin Kylie YanLin Hai Fen Zhou JingLin Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Teacher, UFT Member/ Teacher, UFT Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Academic excellence and enhancing social emotional learning are PS 170’s ultimate school goals. The following are the values we uphold in the pursuit of our goals. Love for children and respect for teachers are the core values of the school community.   Curricula aligned with the NYS Next Generation Learning Standards are instructional prerequisites.  Instructional practice should be aligned to Danielson's Framework for Teaching.   Instruction should provide multiple access points to meet the needs of and to be cognitively challenging to every child including English Language Learners and Students with Learning Disabilities.  Teacher development should be supportive, differentiated, criteria-based, self-initiated, and lifelong.  Well-rounded education, including STEAM, arts, physical and health education, and social emotion learning, highlights the school’s curriculum.  Parents are the children’s first and lifelong teachers and their involvement in their child’s education is key to their child’s success.  Embracing cultural diversity empowers parents and students and nurtures respect in the school community. It is our responsibility to create a nurturing, safe, and healthy learning environment for our children. Invest in instructional technology and be prepared for a new era of teaching.  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We are a Title 1 school (about 86 % of our students qualify for free or reduced lunch). 56% of our students are Asian, 17% Hispanic, 25% White (among which about 20% are Arabic), and 2% others. 35% of our students are English Language Learners (ELL) and 16% are students with learning disability. Counting the former ELLs who are in need of continued support, the majority of the students in the school need scaffolding support in learning English as a new language . To that end, we have developed an ENL New Comer Program offering an alternative ENL/ELA curriculum to newcomer students in grades three through five. Such students are pulled from their homeroom classes during the literacy blocks to work with an ENL teacher in a lab-based setting with many ENL supports such as an ENL curriculum, visuals, and multimedia resources. In addition, we have also created an ENL Through the Theater Arts program for ELL students. This program gives the students the opportunities to practice their English listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills through performing the plays that they have developed through literacy instruction. We support our students through our unwavering commitment to the arts. We offer band, violin, chorus, and theater in addition to our visual arts and music programs. We also partner with many outside organizations, such as the Sinoartists Center, Midori and Friends, Inside Broadway, and TheaterMoves, to further enrich students’ learning experiences. One of the school's top priority is to create STEAM classrooms in which students work in a team and apply the science, math, and engineering skills to solve real-life problems. Our investment in technology also helps teachers to redefine and redesign classroom instruction to provide students with a much greater potential for their talent. The school provided an iPad cart for all classes in grades K-5. All classes in grades 2-5 have a laptop computer cart with 24 computers. To help teachers provide multiple entry points into cognitively challenging tasks for all students, we provided extensive professional development in Smart technology so that teachers can plan interactive, engaging lesson delivered via the Smartboard. All teachers in grades 2-5 have been trained in using Smart Amp, a cloud-based application that allows teachers to bring all digital resources to the fingertips of our students, differentiate instruction with ease and effectiveness, assess student work instantly, and present lessons in new and innovative ways. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our top special population is our English language learners. Among the English language learners, the students from Middle Eastern countries, such as Yemen, are usually 1 - 3 years behind or have little former education. Many of their mothers are deprived of education in their country and therefore, are not able to provide academic support at home. Some of these students are ELLs of special needs, which present special challenges in program design and searching for appropriate curriculum. In terms of school performance accountability, the Middle East students are categorized as white and their performance is measured and compared with the other white students in the state, who are quite different in ELL and social economical status. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 0  Teacher teams were actively engaged in data inquiry. Teacher teams reviewed formative and summative data of special need and ELL students to identify the needs and the target students. Research-based instructional strategies were applied to address the identified needs. Teachers benefit from inter-visitations and sharing instructional practices. Assessment results and student work were reviewed to evaluate the effectiveness of the intervention strategies. In 2018 and 2019 school year, we will reflect upon our inquiry practice in 2017-2018 and deepen our inquiry work. We will also include Social Emotional Learning strategies in our inquiry. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K170 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1035 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 18 18 43 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 10 6 39 38 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 86.4% % Reduced Lunch 33.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 17.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 25.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 9.09 0% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 53.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 87% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO NO NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES NO N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 97 94 35 96.3% 4.8% 15.3% 0.5% 55.7% 1.0% 4 0% 6.1 66.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At this time, the NYS test results have not been released. Based on our analysis on available school data and the released Met/Did not Meet results, the school’s priority remains on English language arts, especially on English language learners. The school leadership team and the school’s cabinet have had extensive and thorough discussions on possible causes and areas in need of improvement. The common consensus can be briefly summarized as follows: Differentiated instruction in a small group setting should happen more often Data inquiry is effective but needs to go deeper Social emotion is one of the major factor affecting student progress Effective communication with parents and strong parent support are always the key Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school’s English Language arts and the mathematics performance results will be increased by an average of 3% as evidenced by the 2019 New York State English Language Arts and mathematics tests for grades 3-5. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will redesign our cluster program to departmentalize STEAM/Science and Social Studies. On the one hand, the new design will enable the classroom teachers to focus on the instruction of English Language Arts and Mathematics. On the other hand, it ensures the instructional time and quality of the STEAM/Science and Social Studies programs. Through the data inquiry process, all teachers will review and analyze the 2017-2018 student performance data and student work, reflect on the teacher practice, and explore for more effective instructional strategies to enhance the student performance in both English language arts and mathematics. The inquiry process will have a focus on English language learners. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teaching staff Summer 2018 School administration Teachers and students September through June Teachers Instructional Coaches Technology Specialist Administrators Teachers Instructional Coaches Technology Specialist Administrators Teachers, coaches, administrators, service providers, guidance counselors, parent coordinator, and para-professionals As another outcome from the cluster program redesign, classroom teachers of grades K-5 will be provided with 5 small group instruction periods a week so that they can provide enrichment or intervention based on the needs of their students. Teachers and students September through November Social emotion learning is an important factor in the education process. We have trained the staff on the RULER program and will introduce the program to students in 2018-2019. Teachers and students September through June We will continue to expand the use of the powerful and comprehensive data tool, IOEducation, to keep academic records, organize and analyze performance data, administer tests, assign homework, and generate students reports. Teachers, students, and parents can access student and school information on apps with cell phones, tablets, or computers. students and Parents September Teachers through June parent coordinator 4 For details, see section 5E. We will provide RTI service and after school intervention programs to AIS students identified using State test results and other student assessment data. At risk students September through June We will promote reading and writing through various activities such as Reading Campaign, Spelling Bees, Debates, and Writing Contests. All students September through June Instructional Coaches Administrators RTI teachers After school teachers All staff and administration Supervisors will analyze the observation data and feedback of 2017-2018, summarize the patterns and trends of needs in teaching practice, and share the findings with the faculty. We will also develop or organize teacher trainings based on our findings. All faculty June 2018 - June 2019 Supervisors and coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the school year, parent workshops and other parent involvement activities will be provided for parents to learn about different school programs, receive important school information and access useful educational resources, and participate various activities to enhance parent-teacher and parent-student relationships. Cool Culture for Kindergarten classes with parent trip guidance September - curriculum orientation at night conference - Parent workshops on setting up IO Education Accounts First Friday of Every Month - parent workshops of various topics October - Pumpkin patch November - Parent teacher conferences with appointment December - Winter concert February - Cultural Festival March - Parent workshops on state tests November - April - Parent literacy nights May - Family Festival - May Parent - student Fun Night 5  The above activities will be organized by teachers, coaches, parent coordinator, guidance counselors, and administrators. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Three STEAM/Science teachers, two Junior Great Books teachers, and three social studies teachers will be funded to provide the 5 small group instruction periods for each classroom teacher. IO Education system and training will be purchased   RULER Program and training will be purchased  All needed supplies and services for the listed activities will be purchased. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. September 2018: The school leadership team will review, revise, and approve the goal and the action plans. End of January 2018: The school leadership team will review the implementation of the action plans to ensure the school is on track to achieve the goal. June 2019: The school leadership team will review if the school has met the goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) All ReadyGEN unit tests, Go Math Chapter tests, performance-based tasks, ELA/Math practice tests, Fountas and Pinnell assessment, and student work samples. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Social emotion learning plays a very important role in the education process, which has been confirmed by many researches. The Department of Education and the district have set social emotion learning as one of the priorities for next school year. Our school has been designated by the Department of Education as the Respect-for-All school in the past three years. While this is an acknowledgement of our achievement, we see the needs in enhancing social emotion learning for our administrators, our school staff, and our students. Our staff have to increase their awareness of how their emotion may affect their children and how to be their best selves in resolving conflicts. At the school level, we need a coherent and systematic approach to guide us in social emotion learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-2019 school year students in grades K-5 will be introduced to the Yale Research Centers RULER Program to develop their social emotional skills and related vocabulary. Classroom teachers will create and implement a class charter with students that promotes and sustains a positive school climate and culture. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September-June 2019, students will be introduced to the Yale RULER program and learn how to Recognize, Understand, Label, Express, and Regulate emotions. They will go through a series of lessons from the online RULER community. K-5 Students September 2018-June 2019 School administration, coaches, teachers, and other support staff (including dean, guidance counselors, and parent coordinator) September-December 2018, students will create and establish a class charter based on the Yale RULER approach. K-5 Students September - Classroom teachers January-June 2019, through the use of a Mood Meter, students will learn vocabulary to describe their feelings and learn strategies to regulate their emotions. K - 5 students December 2018 January - June 2019 Classroom teachers, coaches, supervisors, dean, and guidance counselors Parent involvement and support for the SEL program is key to its success. Therefore, information sessions and parent SEL workshops will be provided by the parent coordinator. parents October 2018 - June 2019 Parent Coordinator and other support staff Students will be nominated to participate in leadership positions based on their social/emotional performances. (Young Ambassadors, Handy Helpers, Library Squad, and Green Team, Soccer Stars) select teachers and Students October 2018 through June 2019 Teachers dean Progress regarding year two RULER "roll out" will be reported from October-June at SLT and PTA meetings. SLT and PTA October 2018 - June 2019 guidance counselors Administrators Principal and principal designees 8 Staff will work collaboratively during extended day PD sessions to explore RULER Online Community to learn, create, and implement the social emotional program. staff September 2018-June 2019 Whole staff and administration For inquiry work related to social emotional learning, please see section 5C. see 5c see 5c see 5c 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent involvement and support for the SEL program is key to its success. Therefore, information sessions and parent SEL workshops will be planned for the parents. Reports of year two RULER "roll out" will be provided from October-June at SLT and PTA meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Payment will be made to purchase the materials or subscriptions for the RULER program.  Needed supplies or services will be purchased to support the initiative. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By end of January 2019, the following should be completed: 1. Class charters for K-5 classes 2. Development SEL lessons for K-5 classes 3. Planning of parents workshops Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Creating and implementing class charters. Development of SEL lessons Development of SEL parent workshops Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2017-2018 school year teachers continued to collaboratively work on unwrapping the inquiry process and identifying the steps required to conduct an authentic and meaningful inquiry into teaching and learning effectiveness. As inquiry teams met and analyzed baseline assessments, student work samples, and conference notes, teachers noted student strengths and trends and patterns of student needs. Based on their review of relevant research, teachers explored using various strategies to assist students in improving writing. Such strategies included explicit instruction, graphic organizers, checklists and/or mnemonic devices and they provided students with the scaffolds needed to be able to independently apply the learned skill. Through collaborative work such as team discussions, inter-visitations, and analysis of student work, teacher teams have completed 3 cycles of inquiry and deepened their insight into both the inquiry process and the performance of the ELL and SWD students . For the 2018-2019 school year, we see the need to continue the inquiry work to deepen our understanding of the inquiry process and be able to drive instruction more effectively with findings from the inquiry on student data. Teacher inquiry teams will target the English language learner students as well as the students of special needs. The target grade is grade 3. The new focus is based on our review of the school data. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Throughout the 2018 -2019 school year, grade level inquiry teams will target English Language Learners and students of special needs with a focus on social emotional learning . By June 2019, all inquiry teams should have completed 2 cycles of inquiry work following the district's protocol for data inquiry. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher teams will meet periodically during the extended day PD sessions to plan and discuss inquiry work, look at student work samples, analyze student assessment data, observe demo lessons through inter-visitation, debrief about their learning, etc. Beginning this year, teachers will discuss the SEL of target students to ensure SEL is a focus of the inquiry. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 teachers, coaches, supervisors, and other support staff From September through October, teachers will explore the Ruler Community on-line resources to gain further knowledge in teaching the four elements of the Ruler Program: classroom charter, mood meter, meta-moment, and blueprint. Teachers September through early October Teachers Instructional Coaches In November, teacher teams on each grade will identify 2-3 students whose social emotional needs affect their learning using teacher anecdotes, IEPs, and reports, etc. K-5 Students November Teachers Administrators Instructional Coaches Administrators Teachers Instructional Coaches Administrators From December to mid-March, teacher teams will work with the targeted students with selected strategies to identify and regulate their emotions. K-5 Students December 2018 - Mid-March 2019 In mid-March, teacher teams will evaluate the targeted students’ progress to determine if we will continue to use the same strategies or a different one in cycle 2 K-5 Students Mid-March - Teachers June 2019 Instructional Coaches Administrators 1  To promote cohesion and consistence among inquiry teams, team members will use an inquiry template to document the development and execution of their inquiry work, which will include the data used for analysis, the identified needs, the target students, the research used, the strategy description, and meeting notes, the meeting agenda/attendance, the conclusion of the inquiry. A cross-grade level and cross-discipline core team will be formed to share practices. the core team will meet at beginning and at the end of each inquiry cycle. Teachers teachers September through June weekly September through June Teachers and administrators of partner schools. Teachers Supervisory observations will provide guidance and feedback to support inquiry process Teachers as needed administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. SLT and PTA will be informed of the inquiry process in the curriculum orientation in September. Inquiry teams will also share observations and strategies with parents of the target students. Classroom teachers will schedule a parent meeting with the target students at the beginning, at mid-point, and at the end of each inquiry cycle to recruit parent support and update parents of their child's progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Common preparation periods will be scheduled for all grades. ● Per session hours will be funded for additional inquiry work ● District and Brooklyn South staff will be consulted Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2  SEL learning and planning September - October Cycle I November - March Cycle II March - June Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Inquiry teams will report the inquiry work to and consult the school leadership team in December, March, and June respectively for cycles I and II. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In 2017-2018 school year, we developed a small group instruction program allowing classroom teachers with 5 periods a week to provide intervention to level II students. Based on the feedback we received from both the UFT consultation commitee and the School Leadership Team, we will keep the small group instruction program but teachers will have the flexibility to design their own small group instruction program based on the needs of their students, be it enrichment or intervention, or both. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-2019 school year, we will redesign our cluster program to provide K-5 classroom teachers five periods of small group instruction per week for enrichment or intervention based on individual student needs. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Create an innovative cluster program that provides both enrichment curriculum to the students and coverage for classroom teachers to conduct small group instruction. After discussion with the SLT and the UFT consultation committee, the following programs will be added to the existing cluster programs:  2 Junior Great Books periods for each class in grades 2-5  2 STEAM/Science periods for each class in grades K-5  2 Social Studies periods to each class in grades K-5.  1 writing period to each class in grades 3-5 K - 5 students and classroom teachers Training will be provided for both cluster and classroom teachers in relation to their programs. classroom teachers Revise the suggested list of instructional activities for the 5 RTI/small group instruction periods a week. Revise the system to effective document the additional Small Group Instruction services and collect student progress data for review and analysis. Classroom teachers and target students classroom teachers and target students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September through June cluster and Classroom teachers September through June September RTI teachers, coaches, and outside consultants. coaches and supervisors. July -September 2018 coaches and supervisors How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In September, teachers will inform the parents of this initiative at the parent-teacher conference. Teachers will communicate with parents of the target students throughout the school year during the parent engagement sessions to update them on student progress and to recruit parent supports. 5  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Three STEAM/Science teachers, two Junior Great Books teachers, and 3 Social Studies teachers positions will be funded.  All related materials will be purchased. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Supervisors will make the observations of small group instruction periods one of the teacher evaluation priorities and provide teachers with guidance and feedback. The school leadership team will review the effectiveness of the program in November, February and May with data provided by the school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The school will collect the data (e.g. F & P levels) from the target students and analyze their progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In 2017 -2018 school year, we piloted a STEM curriculum with grades 2-5 and also participated in the district's STEM Coach Program. For the 2018-2019 school year, we have selected Harcourt's STEM-oriented Science curriculum, Dimensions, as our science curriculum for K-5. We have also awarded a STEM Grant from the Brooklyn Borough President ($346,800) for STEM Labs. With this resources, we will implement a school wide STEM/Science curriculum as well as an after school STEAM Enrichment program for grades K-5. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-2019 school year, an after school STEAM enrichment program will be created for grades K-5. Students will complete a minimum of three projects by June 2019. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The after school STEAM enrichment program will run from October to June 2019, two days per week from 3:00 – 5:00pm for selected students in grades K-5. students, staff, and parents October 2018 - June 2019 All staff Administrators Teachers will be given STEAM training and planning time starting in September and ongoing throughout the year to create projects, develop lessons, and prepare materials for the program. teachers and supervisors September through June We will continue to participate in the district’s STEAM committee in order to work collaboratively and learn from the fellow District 20 schools. Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers Instructional Coaches Administrators Teachers Instructional Coaches Administrators Students will be given an opportunity to participate in the District 20 STEM Expo. Teachers TBA Teachers Parents Students parents Administrators Students March 2019 Teachers Teachers Parents Administers Parents will be invited to a STEM Showcase during the March Parent Teacher Conference where students can share their finished projects. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Advertise the program to the parents at PTA meetings and thorough our school website. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 8  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Per session fund for teaching and supervisory staff  Fund for purchasing supply for the program Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. September: Posting for the program will be up. October: Students will be recruited and program will begin March: Program Showcase during the Parent-Teacher conference TBA: Participation in the district's STEAM Exhibit June: End of the program showcase Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Projects will be evaluated by rubrics. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Fountas and Pinnell Reading Levels ELA State Test Results End of Unit Assessments Writing Samples Class Work School grading policy End of Unit Assessments NYSTest results Class Work School grading policy Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Response to Intervention (RtI) Grades 1-3. Teachers use reading remedies such as Wilson, Orton Gillinghem, LindamoodBell, and leveled literacy, etc After school intervention Flexible Intervention Response to Intervention After school intervention Small group no larger than five students. During the school day. Small group no larger than 12 students Small group no larger than 10 students After school Before, during, after school Small group no larger than 5 students During school Small group no larger than 12 students Small group no larger than 10 students After school Flexible Intervention Science End of Unit Assessment Student work Differentiated instruction Small group no larger than 10 Before, During, After school During school 0 Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) NYSScience Test School grading policy End of Unit Assessment Student work School grading policy Teacher report Parent concerns Classroom Observations Student work Differentiated instruction Small group no larger than 10 During school Guidance Program Small group no larger than 5 students During and after school Speech Program Small group no larger than 3 students 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 3 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Guidance support, transportation support, after school care support, and clothing drive for the families Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Our school’s hiring practice is guided by our instructional needs and goals. In order to facilitate more flexibility in programming and services, we attempt to hire teachers who have dual or triple licensure in Common Branch, ESL and Special Education. Assignment of teachers is done based on school needs and goals in conjunction with specific teacher talent. All new teachers are expected to participate in a mentor program which is intended to give them ongoing support and address their specific needs. Throughout the year, new teachers are invited to attend many workshops planned specifically for them. For example, we hold workshops about school policy, record keeping and classroom management, ESL and special education compliance, ENL teacher strategies, UDL strategies, Smart Note Book and Smart Amp, and promotion policy, etc. New teachers are encouraged to review the Danielson Framework for Teaching Components and develop professional goals and action plans according to the Department of Education’s guidelines as they begin to prepare for the tenure process. Our professional development plan always includes opportunities for all teachers to participate in professional learning communities and workshops that help them improve their practice through planning and implementing the CCLS in all subjects. For example, teacher teams regularly select lessons to plan together using DFT as a guide. Demo lessons are planned and observed through inter-visitations. Our goal is to continue to develop highly effective teachers at every level as evidenced by the teacher observation system, ADVANCE. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our professional development plan focuses on the professional learning community as a structure in which teacher teams plan, observe and reflect on best practices to help all students meet the CCLS. This year, we focus on Close Reading, questioning and discussion skills, new social studies curriculum, creating STEM classroom, and data inquiry. 4  Most of the professional development activities will be teacher-led and teacher-assessed. The PD activities will be conducted during the extended hours. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Every year, we host a kindergarten orientation in June preceding the beginning of the school year to advise parents about the types of programs and curricula that their child will have in kindergarten. We provide parents with activities for their child to do before they attend school, such as learning letters of the alphabet and numbers. We also request that parents help their children recall their phone numbers and addresses. During the first day of school, kindergarten students are only required to stay for a half day. On the first day, children are accompanied by their parents for an assembly about school routines. On the second day, parents accompany their children in the classroom. Parents assist while children learn classroom routines and expectations. This process eases kindergarten students into the routines and lessens their anxiety about attending school. At registration, if parents indicate that their home language is other than English, students are administered the NYSITELL in July to assess their English proficiency, and if necessary, are placed in classes where they receive ENLor Dual Language services. This year, all kindergarten classes have teachers with dual or triple licenses in Common Branches, ESL and/or Special Education. Other testing is completed as part of the Turning Five process for students who have special needs. Upon receiving an Individual Education Program (IEP), students receive appropriate services, such as speech, occupational and/or physical therapy. Each month, kindergarten families are invited to participate in our, “Fun Fridays.” To help cultivate the love of reading, parents visit their child’s class and read books to groups of students. After the class visits, parents are invited to stay for informative workshops. Each year, we purchase Cool Culture cards for every family of kindergarten 5  students. This pass allows families to visit over 90 cultural and historic places of interest around New York City. We will monitor participation through two parent surveys administered throughout the school year. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers work with instructional coaches and supervisors to determine the benefit and expected outcome of testing. Teachers use a number of assessments to gauge their students’ progress and performance, including but not limited to predictive and formative assessments in ELA and Math, the New York State ELA and Math Tests, Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Reading Assessments, unit tests and performance tasks. All student work is also assessed against standards based rubrics. Teachers begin with a baseline assessment at the beginning of the year and administer assessments throughout the year to determine specific needs for each student. Teacher teams regularly meet to review student assessment and work to identify trends and plan next instructional steps. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 12-14 x x 15-17 18-19 23-24 12-14 15-17 18-19 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 854,478.00 Title II, Part A Federal 149,959.00 6  Title III, Part A Federal 45,884.00 Title III, Immigrant Federal 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 5,372,017.00 x x x 23-24 12-14 15-17 18-19 23-24 12-14 15-17 18-19 23-24 12-14 15-17 18-19 23-24 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent 7  and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 8  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 170, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 170 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 9  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 0  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events and activities throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent-Teacher Association, Title I Parent Committee; ● hosting four family literacy nights; 1   Grade 3-5 Test Prep/Curriculum Workshops in Everyday Math and ELA ● hosting our annual Family Fun Festival, Informative Family Workshops during the Day/Evening, First Fridays; ● hosting events to support men asserting leadership in education for their children. ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  providing parents with the ability to acess their NYC Student account. ● developing web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand; ● encouraging participation in cultural family field trips during winter and spring recess; ● support Cool Culture Program by providing each Kindergarten family with a Cool Culture Pass, that provide free admission to over 90 cultural institutions within New York City for the entire school year; School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2017/2018 PS 170, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are posted on school web site and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 3  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 4  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 5  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: The Ralph A. Fabrizio School This school is (check one): DBN: 20K170 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P.S. 170 offers its ENL students a myriad of supplemental programs affording the immigrant population additional academic instruction. This year, P.S. 170 will create two after school direct supplemental instruction programs to be offered to ENL students in Grades K through 5. The after-school ELA program will target students in Grades 2 through 5 who are at the Emerging to Transitioning Levels of language acquisition based on the data from the Spring 2018 NYSESLAT scores. The language of instruction will be English. Twelve certified ENL teachers will attend professional development to be trained in delivering instruction using a shared inquiry approach and resources from the myOn E-reader website which will be purchased for the program. The myOn E-reader website combines reading, content-rich texts, and scientifically-based assessments for the teachers. In conjunction with the After-School ELA Program, P.S. 170 will be offering an After-School STEM Program for students in Grades K-5. Eight ENL teachers and four content-area teachers will deliver instruction in English using materials from STEM Solutions, a blended learning, project-based curriculum. These teachers will use multiple methods for delivery of instruction to reach all types of our English language learners. Our ENL and content-area teachers will have on-going support with monthly live webinars and staff development allowing for best practices. The After-School ELA Program and After-School STEM Program will begin on Monday, November 19th, 2018 and end on Thursday, March 28th, 2019. The classes in Grades K through 5 will be no smaller than five students, but no more than fifteen. There will be twenty-four classes in total, allowing for five classes per grade. All teachers will be given teacher preparation time from 3:00 p.m. to 3:25 p.m.. Instruction will take place from 3:30 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday. Ongoing analysis of student data and student after-school work will drive instruction. The materials used in the ELA program will provide an individualized literacy program in a personalized literacy environment to match our English language learners' needs. Similarly, our STEM Solutions curriculum will help to increase student learning in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics in order for students to acquire a cohesive set of concepts and competencies in STEM. Additionally, P.S. 170 will offer a Saturday Test Prep Program for our ENL learners in Grades 3, 4, and 5 to prepare for the State ELA and Math Exams. The program dates include March 2, 9, 16, 23, 30, as well as April 6 and 13, 2019. Teachers will be given preparatory time from 8:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. ELA instruction will be from 9:00 a.m. to 11:20 a.m. and Math instruction will be from 11:20 a.m. to 12:20 a.m. There will be nine certified ENL teachers delivering instruction using ENL teaching methodologies. There will be no more than fifteen students in each class. Saturday program teaching materials will be purchased including Coach Test Prep books for ELA and Math and teacher supplies, including chart paper, folders, and pencils. Additional books and supplies will be purchased for our ENL students in the STEM program in Grades 2 through 5. 7  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Begin description here: At P.S. 170 support for the staff responsible for the delivery of instruction and services to our targeted immigrant students is ongoing throughout the school year, meaningful, specific, purposeful, and applicable. Professional development sessions focus on the needs of our immigrant and non-immigrant ELL population in the classroom and in the school building as a whole. For the 2018-19 school year, we will provide professional development in reading, writing, and STEM comprehension, ENL strategies that promote academic language acquisition and use, workshops developing advanced literacy in our 3rd, 4th, and 5th grade ELLs, training building social-emotional vocabulary in our ENL students and create and implement social-emotional class charters. - On Monday, October 1, 2018 and Tuesday, October 2, 2018, from 7:55 a.m. to 8:35 a.m., the ENL Coordinator and Assistant Principal will provide two training workshops to ENL and DL teachers on setting up their ENL and DL classroom environments. Teachers will share how to provide picture-rich and word-rich rooms that are culturally sensitive, warm, and inviting to allow for optimum learning. ENL and DL teachers will explore how charts build a culture of literacy in the classroom and enable ELLs to make connections as new learning takes place. - On Wednesdays, October 10th, 2018 and October 17th, 2018, from 7:55 a.m. to 8:35 a.m., ENL and DL teachers will attend a two part workshop on "Ways to Integrate ENL/ ELA Instruction Using L1 and L2". - On Tuesday, November 13th, 2018, from 7:55a.m. to 8:35 a.m., the ENL teachers will attend a workshop given by the ENL Coordinator entitled: "Growing and Showing Our Feelings With Words". Teachers will create lessons and activities to teach feeling vocabulary to ENL students to facilitate a rich emotional climate in their classrooms. This workshop will be on-going throughout the school year with future dates to be determined. - Date To Be Determined for 2018: ENL Teachers will attend a workshop given by the ENL Coordinator entitled: "Strategy Vs. Skill" Teachers will pinpoint strategies teachers use in the ENL classroom in order for ENL students to obtain the necessary skills needed for academic progress and success in writing. - Starting on Thursday, November 8th, 2018 and every other Thursday of the month ending in May, 2019, from 3:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m., the ENL coordinator will meet with ENL teachers to address helping newcomer ELLs access grade level literacy texts. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration 8  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities topics to be covered   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: At P.S. 170, family involvement is meaningful and collaborative. Our parent engagement workshops and meetings focus on long-term objectives, critical thinking, and enthusiasm about learning. We believe parental involvement in a child's education helps to improve the student's academic performance. - Every First Friday of the month, from 8:40 a.m. to 9:35 a.m., parents will be invited, by grade, to their child's classroom to read books to the students in the language of their choice. To support family literacy, parent workshops are held immediately following First Fridays, from 9:40 a.m. to 10:25 a.m., that introduce reading strategies and a multitude of resources to family members. Parents of our immigrant families are notified of these dates through the P.S. 170 Parent Handbook and P.S. 170 Calendar, website, PTA meetings, and translated letters that are backpacked home. Our parent coordinator facilitates these monthly workshops. "Encouraging Story Talk" is one of the workshop titles. Each topic will be grade specific. First Friday Dates are as follows: Friday, October 5th, 2018 - Grade 4, November 2nd, 2018 - Grade 3, December 7th, 2018 - Grade 2, January 4th, 2019 - Grade 5, February 1st, 2019 - Dual Language Classes (K-2), March 1st, 2019, April 5th, 2019 - Grade 1, and May 3rd, 2019. - Every year, P.S. 170 celebrates our Annual Cultural Celebration Festival in which ENL parents are invited to view student dance performances that acknowledge the diverse cultures of the immigrants that come to our school. Students wear elaborate costumes from a variety of countries and artwork specific to the countries of our students' origins is displayed throughout the school building, in the auditorium, and on stage. This celebration fosters a warm sense of community and citizenship while honoring the many traditions, languages, and customs of our immigrant population. All ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, invited dance teachers, and most of the staff participate in this grand production. The Cultural Festival will take place on Thursday, January 31st, 2018 from 6:30 p.m. - 9:00 p.m. - Every year, our parent coordinator provides a workshop explaining how to use the Cool Culture Pass; a family pass providing free general admission to over 90 cultural institutions. Parents of ELLs are encouraged to take their children to cultural institutions, educational venues, and museums throughout the five boroughs to build their background knowledge. The Kindergarten Cool Cultures Workshop will take place on Friday, October 5th, 2018 from 9:40 a.m. to 10:25 a.m. A trip to the Museum of Natural History will take place in the Spring of 2019 for our ENL families. - Every year, our ENL Coordinator provides a workshop for the parents of our immigrant students highlighting the public school registration procedure, language program selection process, and understanding the NYSESLAT. Helpful materials and resources are distributed to the families. This year, the ENL coordinator will give each family a book entitled, Coming To America, and share their stories of immigration. ENL Parent Orientation/ Workshop will take place on Friday, September 21st, 2018 from 9:00 a.m. to 10:15 a.m. - The ENL Coordinator will provide a workshop in which parents of ELLs are informed of a variety of activities that can be implemented at home to assist their children with English Language acquisition. These activities are geared to help the parents acquire the new language along with their child as many of our parents of immigrant students are also learning the language along with their children. Most suggestions help guide parents with assisting their 9  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities offspring in the completion of homework and projects and studying for exams even though they, themselves, do not have English language fluency. How To Support Your ELL At Home Workshop - Friday, September 21st, 2018, following ENL Parent Orientation. - Parent Literacy Workshop will be facilitated by the school librarian for parents of our immigrant students. Parents will be assisted in the library card application process, given educational software information and resources, learn about reading literacy, and discover where the libraries are located in the neighborhood. Date To Be Determined - A Middle School Workshop will be given to fifth grade parents about the middle school application and selection process by the parent coordinator and guidance counselor. Special considerations will be provided for our parents of ELLs. Date To Be Determined - Parents of Grades 3, 4, and 5 will have an opportunity to learn about the structure of the NYS Exams and ask questions. Our testing coordinator, parent coordinator, and ENL coordinator will inform our ENL parents of the testing accommodations given to ELLs. This workshop will provide an in-depth look at the types of questions and language demands required of students in order to be successful on both exams. Grades 3, 4, and 5 ELA/ Math State Tests Preparation Workshop - Thursday, December 6th, 2018,6:00 p.m. - 7:30 p.m. - On Friday, March 1st, 2019, P.S. 170 will invite ENL parents to our Month of Writing Kick-Off Assembly. - On Thursday, March 14th, 2019, our STEM teachers and ENL students in the STEM After-School Program and ENL students in STEM classes during the day will present their on-hands projects in the STEM Fair. Projects will be on display from 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. for viewing and sharing. - P.S. 170 Annual Family Festival - Saturday, June 15th, 2019 from 9:30 A.M. TO 1:30 p.m. All the above events and workshops include translations and translators to make the information comprehensible for our parents of ELLs whose native language is not English. In addition to sending home notifications translated in the three major languages represented at P.S. 170, all parent engagement activities will be posted on the school's website and advertised during PTA meetings. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 0  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 20 School Name The Ralph A. Fabrizio School Borough Brooklyn School Number 170 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Tony Wu Coach Elen Stratis ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Maria Impagliazzo Teacher/Subject Area Melanie Fonollosa/ Math Teacher/Subject Area Sewai Lynch/ ELA Related-Service Provider Lauren Boykin Superintendent Karina Costantino Assistant Principal Holli Sainz Coach Laura Mirto School Counselor Noreen McLaughlin and Vera Efs Parent Aida Ahmad Parent Coordinator Abigail Figueroa Field Support Center Staff Member Lucia Medina-Perez Other (Name and Title) Kristi Pollock - A.P. C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 12 0 8 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 2 20 4 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 2 D. Student Demographics 2  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1019 Total number of ELLs 327 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 32.09% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Chinese and English Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) Lang. Chinese/ Englis 2016-2017 Chinese/ 2017-18 Englis Chinese/ 2018-19 Englis Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL 2 2 2 2 Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 2 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 2 2 2 6 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses the Fountas and Pinnell (F&P) Benchmark Assessment Systems in grades Kindergarten through grade five. This assessment is given to our students four times a year (October, February, May and June) to monitor their reading progress. This assessment provides useful information about students' reading behaviors, independent reading levels, oral vocabulary development, fluency, and comprehension levels. According to the F&P results from the end of the 2018 school year,( 42% of ENLs in grade 1 were reading below or at level A, while less than 5% of non-ENL students were reading below Level A.) Since ENL students lack strong foundational skills in reading and are greatly hindered from having access to the CCLS, the Journeys curriculum in grades K and 1, and the ReadyGEN curriculum in grades 2-5, we are focusing on providing response to 3  Intervention (RTI) in ELA to students in all grades. Currently, over 50% of all first grade students receiving RTI are ENL students. In the 2018-2019 school year, all ENL students will receive Tier I, Tier II, and Tier III interventions to target and address the individual ELA needs of our ELL population. The number of NYSESLAT Test Takers and Modalities of Need Report indicates that current Grade 3 through 5 ENL students scored low in the Writing Modality section of the NYSESLAT as second through fourth graders. These ENL students have been identified as a major area of need for our ENL population. This school year, the Writing teacher will design tasks and scaffold instruction for optimum ELL student participation and growth. The teacher will analyze on going written assessments completed by ELL students to accurately pinpoint areas of need. Our school-wide focus on vocabulary acquisition, syntax development, and reading comprehension are all aimed at raising the number of ELLs who meet the designated literacy benchmark for their grade and to meet grade level Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). Students in kindergarten and first grade follow a curriculum called Journeys. Additionally, in Grades K and 1, students learn phonics through a kinesthetic, multi-modal approach to learning phonics and phonemic awareness and aspects of language arts through a program entitled Zoophonics. Students are assessed in phonics and reading comprehension on a weekly basis through a multitude of classroom assessments. Students in grades 2-5 are also assessed using Performance-Based Assessments (PBA) from our reading program, ReadyGen. These assessments are administered at the end of each module (two per unit) and are used to assess students' reading comprehension. In 2nd grade, the PBA is a writing assessment which incorporates all of the concepts learned from the module. In grades 3-5, the PBA consists of two parts, a writing assignment and a multiple-choice assessment which is similar to the New York State ELA Exam. In addition, our students are assessed in mathematics using chapter and unit assessments from our mathematics program, Go Math! Both of these assessments are aligned to the New York State Common Core Learning Standards. Students in grades 3-5 are also assessed with baseline ELA and Math assessments at the beginning of the year. The results of these assessments have shown that ENL students lack vocabulary knowledge in both ELA and Math, prior and background knowledge of the topic at hand, and the ability to provide relevant information from a text or texts to support their views, and difficulty in performing math word problems that require more than two steps in order to attain the final result. To address this need, every grade meets on Monday and Tuesday mornings to conduct collaborative inquiry with the guidance of an instructional coach or administrator to focus on improving writing across the genres. During this time, assessment results and student work are discussed and analyzed so that our teachers can set instructional goals for our students. Specific strategies for working with ENLs are shared, multiple scaffolds are created, assessments are designed and evaluated, rubrics are developed, and interventions are planned. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers are given the opportunity to meet during two weekly morning meetings which are fifty minutes each, two - five weekly common preparatory meetings which are forty-five minutes each, after school planning meetings, as well as professional development workshops to share best practices, improve curriculum instruction, create and/ or master student curriculum-embedded assessments, teacher-made assessments, and city and/ or state assessments, and evaluate these assessments. The evaluation of these assessments place emphasis on strategies needed to support academic structures geared towards improving the performance of non-native students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use information from several sources to evaluate the success of our ELL programs including the RLAT report from ATS to evaluate (past 3 years) progress on the NYSESLAT, RESI report from ATS to evaluate progress on state exams, information from the school's annual progress report indicating English Language Learner progress, and reading progress as measured by the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark System. In Grades 3-5, we will be measuring student language growth using the Performance Writing Task. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 4  We have a multi-tiered RTI structure in place that will allow Grade K through 5 classroom teachers to provide our ENL students a minimum of four and a maximum of five targeted RTI intervention lessons in the classroom. In addition, ENL students will continue to receive push-in and pull-out ENL services. ENL students in the self-contained and Dual Language classes will receive ninety to three hundred sixty minutes of ENL service from their classroom ENL teacher. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] In order to ensure that ELLs are not incorrectly identified as having a learning disability, the school follows the RTI framework to provide research-based targeted intervention at three different tiers (levels of intensity) to ELLs at risk of not meeting grade level standards. Long-term ELLs are closely monitored for adequate progress with the NYSESLAT. If students do not advance to the next language level and do not meet grade level CCLS standards and reading benchmarks, teachers provide scaffolded instruction during the classroom mini-lesson as well as one-one, paired, or small-group instruction in the classroom during the RTI period. If they do not respond positively to these multi-tiered interventions of instruction in the classroom, they are offered after-school courses or pull-out RTI services as well as Saturday school classes. Teachers use a combination of assessment results and conference notes to inform their decision to invite students to these supplemental services. For the after school program, teachers identify specific skills/ standards that the students are having trouble with and provide specific instruction based around those skills/ standards. Attainment of these skills/ standards is monitored weekly and recorded on a skills assessment sheet which is reported to the Assistant Principals. ELLs that are identified for Tier II and III RTI services receive instruction using a research-based program such as Wilson, Fundations in Grades 2-5, Linda-Moodbell's Visualizing and Verbalizing, Zoophonics in Grades K and 1, or Leveled Literacy Intervention. Teachers also utilize authentic self-made assessments. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data is retrieved from the following outcome assessments: the NYSITELL, the NYSESLAT, the state ELA and Math Exams, Fountas and Pinnell Final Reading Levels, as well as the Math EOY Results. This year, we are adding the NYC ELA EOY Performance Task to our list of given assessments. The EDUR and ELL Data Analysis Tool are used to create the groups of students requiring intensive ENL support in our ENL Newcomer Program. The data patterns across performance levels reveal that our school ( 1) makes annual increases in the number or percentage of ENL students making progress in learning English ; (2) makes annual increases in the number or percentage of LEP students attaining English language proficiency ; and (3) makes Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in English Language Arts and Mathematics for LEP students under Title I. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We have developed a system to track and evaluate the effectiveness of school instruction within the classroom, RTI instruction within the classroom, and RTI pull-out, small group, and one-one instruction. Benchmarks will be created and assessments will be given to mark ENL student growth and compare results from assessment to assessment. Finally, a core team will meet monthly to evaluate reports generated by teachers to assist in the effectiveness of the interventions. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 5  For the 2018-2019 school year, we will have 10 stand-alone ENL classes (2 classes on each grade from grades 1-5) and 5 classes in kindergarten. The students in these classes are taught intensive language instruction throughout the day using ENL methodologies. Teachers in each self-contained class fulfill the mandated minutes of Standalone ENL and Integrated ENL because they possess dual certifications in ENL and common branch. These teachers use ENL strategies as well as provide the core content that elementary school students receive from self-contained common branch classroom teachers. Students in these classes are age appropriate for their particular grade and grouped heterogeneously (mixed proficiency levels). Classes in grades 1-4 have been established in order to provide transitional support services to students who have met exiting criteria. These classes will be taught by a licensed ENL teacher. Students in these classes will consist of former ELLs (who are entitled to 2 years of transitional support services, ELLS and non-ELLs. Former ELLs in grade 5 will be provided transitional support services through a push-in program. Push-in ENL teachers may work in small groups or co-teach with the general education teacher according to the the ELL group size and needs within the class. All our ENL teachers cooperatively plan with the classroom teacher in order to differentiate the literacy lesson to make each lesson comprehensible for our ELL students. Newcomers who score Entering on the NYSITELL upon entrance to P.S. 170 in Grades 3 through 5 and students who have scored Entering or Emerging on the NYSESLAT in grades 2 through 4 will be part of a unique program entitled Intensive and Innovative ENL which is taught by one licensed ENL teacher. This teacher will focus on what skills each student can transfer over into the new English language acquisition class and what each student needs to help each language learner meet and eventually exceed the state learning standards. SAMPLE FIFTH GRADE PUSH-IN/ PULL-OUT SAMPLE STUDENT SCHEDULE: Period 1-ReadyGen Block (scaffolded instruction-push-in ENL or pull-out Intensive and Innovative ENL - 45 minutes of ENL service) Period 2-ReadyGen Block (writing-push-in ENL or pull-out Intensive and Innovative ENL - 45 minutes of ENL service) Period 3-Teacher Common Prep-Writing Period 4-Math (pull-out one-one, pairs, or small group Math or ELA Intervention provided by RTI Math Teacher) Period 5-Lunch Period 6-STEM (push-in one-one, pairs, or small group Math or ELA Intervention provided by classroom teacher) Period 7-Social Studies The push-in and pull-out ENL teacher provides the English language development instruction 90 minutes each day, four times a week, which is a total of 360 minutes each week of direct ENL service. Entering and Emerging Level Students receive 360 minutes of ENL services each week. Transitioning and Explanding Level students receive 180 minutes of English language development services each week. Commanding Level students receive 90 minutes of integrated English language instruction. The school schedule has been designed to have five common preps for each grade per week in order to support our push-in model and planning. In addition, ENL students in grades K and 1 will receive four RTI periods of instruction and students in grades 2 through 5 will receive five RTI periods of instruction. During weekly collective planning periods, collaborating teachers analyze their students' data to identify each student's strengths and weaknesses. With this information at their fingertips, teachers then use the data to plan and differentiate instruction to meet the needs of their students. With the data in hand, teachers will now be able to work with a student individually, work with a pair of students, or choose to work with small groups of students. Teachers will create effective instruction to address skills, standards, topics, strategies, content, and/ or vocabulary specific to the subject of choice. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. P.S. 170 will be in its third year of providing a Dual Language Program to its ENL population and native English language speakers wanting to build speaking, listening, reading, and writing skills in two languages, Chinese(Mandarin) and English. In 2018-19, there will be two Kindergarten classes, two first grade classes, and two second grade classes. The students are instructed in English and the target language of Mandarin.The academic 6  subjects are learned in both languages and students grow to appreciate two cultures. The class is composed of 50% ELLs and 50% English proficient students. The ELA program is Journeys, the phonics program is Zoophonics, and the Math program is Go Math. The students also receive instruction in Social Studies through a curriculum entitled "Passport to Social Studies", physical education, visual arts, as well as ENL Through the Arts. Students receive the same rigorous curricula in Chinese using the same textbooks along with Huan le huo ban Chinese language readers in the targeted language of Mandarin. Parents are involved in their child's learning at home. They are able to participate in an on-line program, Joyreader, in which students listen, read, and reread texts in Mandarin. To practice in the English language, students are invited to log on to RAZ kids, an online leveled library to practice reading independently and engage in meaningful conversations at home with their parents, older siblings, and/ or guardians. Parental education and involvement is a major component for dual language success. Parents are invited to various workshops, classroom activities, performances, and special programs such as First Fridays where parents read to their children and share literary experiences throughout the school year. The Dual Language program strives to educate students who will become successful in their upper grades and higher educational fields of choice and later positive members of society as a whole who are working as confident dual language global communicators. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In each of our self-contained ENL classes, an ENL teacher who is dually licensed in ESOL and Common Branch instructs Entering and Emerging (beginner and low intermediate) students for 360 minutes per week (8 periods per week); this includes 180 minutes of integrated ENL. Within the same classroom, Transitioning and Expanding (high intermediate and advanced students) receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. (2) push-in ENL teachers service (6) ICT classes that have ENL students with disabilities in 1st, 2 nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th grade. All instruction is delivered in English with some native language support for our newcomer students. ENL and ELA are delivered through the use of instructional ENL methodologies, ENL strategies, as well as content-area expertise. ENL students are grouped together; however, they are further grouped into smaller units within the classroom to allow for specific, differentiated, needs-based instruction. All ELL instruction is aligned to the Common Core Curriculum to allow for rigorous work and best practices. In addition, Entering level ENL students receive 360 minutes of English language instruction in a pull-out setting. The program is entitled Intensive and Innovative ENL. The goal of the program is to build strong phonetic skills, acquire vocabulary knowledge, initiate and strengthen comprehension abilities, mold confident communicative aptitudes, and develop fundamental, structural, and comprehensive writing skills. The ENL teacher uses ENL techniques and methodologies, including TPR activities, realea, charts, models, games, repetition, substitution, cloze, and chant exercises (to list several), to enhance instruction. Students receive 360 minutes of Intensive and Innovative ENL instruction per week. Home Language Arts instruction that is delivered in the Dual Language program offers the students the opportunity to be bilingual, biliterate, and bicultural by providing half of their instruction in Chinese, the home language, and the other in English. Students receive a minimum of three content area courses, each content area course is a 45 minute block, in their home language per day, allowing for over 90 minutes of home language instruction a day and more than 360 minutes of instruction in Chinese per week. The same core curriculum standards addressed in English Language Arts and Math in the language of English is taught in the home language of Chinese. Our Dual Language is designed to assist students in transferring skills learned in the home language to accelerate and enhance performance in the second language. Additionally, native language support helps increase the application of prior and background knowledge in all subject areas and boosts literacy development and language acquisition. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL teachers participate in grade level and vertical program planning and implementation of the literacy curriculum. Teachers work together to create differentiated options for portions of the ReadyGEN literacy curriculum. Teachers also refer to the ESL Scaffold handbook for guidance on making instructional decisions. ENL teachers analyze the language demands of 7  each lesson to create vocabulary and grammar activities that support comprehension. Students are provided multiple pathways for demonstrating their comprehension within a subject area. They are encouraged to use both linguistic and non-linguistic means to share their thoughts and ideas. In grades 3-5, students are provided with one-to-one dictionaries in their home languages whenever possible and bilingual math glossaries. Newcomer students at the entering or emerging level are also assigned language buddies whenever possible to help them navigate the school system and become acclimated to their new classrooms. Newcomers in the self-contained ENL classes in Grades 1 and 2 will use the Santillana Spotlight On English textbooks for Academic English Language content and literacy acquisition, comprehension, and oral and written performance. All teachers at P.S. 170 are required to use best practices and teach language through content. Teachers recognize the need to provide the linguistic means for students to fully and clearly utilize their background knowledge and prior knowledge. Teachers have a clear understanding of the cultural and economic backgrounds of the students and use this knowledge to build a strong community of learners. All teachers are also encouraged to use abundant visuals to support student comprehension and the school's SMARTBoards and other forms of technology, including iPads are increasingly used to shelter content with visual cues and to provide multi-media instruction to address the learning modalities and needs of students. Each grade will conduct cross-curricular planning to align the literacy units in ReadyGen to social studies and science concepts to help students gain knowledge of vocabulary and syntax. Each grade will plan, create, and execute STEM projects. These STEM projects are shared in an exhibition in which students use their language abilities to explain the premise of the project as well as answer questions from students and teachers alike. This year, ELL students will participate in an after-school STEM program in Grades K through 5. Teachers use these and other strategies to promote language acquisition and comprehension in an effort to boost students’ CALP skills and help ELLs meet and eventually exceed state learning standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs that are literate in the native language are encouraged to read texts in the native language to support their academic progress in English language development. Furthermore, ELLs that speak Chinese, Spanish, and Arabic are provided opportunities to converse with teachers and paraprofessionals in their native language when appropriate or necessary during classroom instruction. Students in grades 3-5 are provided with one-to-one glossaries for mathematics and their proficiency levels are evaluated with the use of such materials. We are currently considering adding standardized screeners to assess ELLs in their home languages. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Newcomers, long-term ELLs, SIFE, and eligible Special Education students all receive ENL services at P.S. 170. Instructional differentiation is essential for the successful management of such a diverse population. Recently-arrived ELLs are placed in one of our self-contained or push-in ENL classes, where the ENL teacher can provide intensive one-on-one and small group instruction on a daily basis. For newcomer students, ENL teachers ensure that students receive a balance of foundational and conceptual instruction. ELLs benefit from visual and verbal supports including the use of pictures, total physical response activities, short videos, and graphic organizers to represent complex vocabulary and concepts. Similarly, verbal supports include student glossaries, words highlighted in text, whole-class, small-group, and partner discussions that focus on the clarification of new ideas. Students are exposed to rigorous work while being supported in the areas of phonics and foundational reading. Teachers look closely at the guided close reading questions provided by the ReadyGen reading program and scaffold these questions for the students. Teachers consider students' language levels and years of service when they differentiate and scaffold the questions provided by the ReadyGen program. By scaffolding the questions, teachers are able to keep the integrity of the program in tact and promote higher order thinking. These newcomers are assigned a language buddy to help them become acquainted with school routines and student expectations. Teachers of ENLs receiving 4 to 6 years of service, closely examine the areas of need within the four language modalities to provide targeted instruction. As part of the ReadyGen program, there is time allotted for scaffolded instruction for students that exhibit difficulty with grasping the major concepts of a lesson. Newcomer ENLs and ENLs receiving 4-6 years of service are pulled into small groups to be retaught the major concepts during this time. For former ELLs (in years 1 and 2 after testing proficiency), teachers ensure that vocabulary 8  acquisition and proficiency in language conventions is maintained. Teachers receive a report of who has recently tested proficient. Currently, we do not have students that have completed 6+ years of service. Former ELLs that have exited ELL status receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL for up to two years in the form of project-based learning with a dually certified ESOL and Common Branch teacher. As mentioned earlier, students will be receiving targeted RTI instruction within their classrooms four to five additional periods a week to allow for further differentiation of materials and highlight individual areas of need. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All teachers of ELLs-SWDs are required to review each student's IEP (Individualized Educational Plan) at the beginning of the year. Teachers of ELLs-SWDs follow the principles of Universal Design for Learning (UDL) to give all individuals equal opportunities to learn. They provide students with multiple means of representation, action, expression, and engagement. Teachers also evaluate the learning barriers preventing students from accessing the curriculum and work systematically to remove those barriers. For literacy, they focus on using the Scaffolded Strategies Handbook provided by the ReadyGen reading program to unlock the meaning of complex text and provide multiple entry points. The Handbook also includes activities and routines to support reading, writing, speaking, listening, and vocabulary acquisition. For mathematics, teachers refer to the Go Math! ELL Activity Guide, Enrich Book, and Re-teach Book to support ELL-SWDs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses the CORE checklist to ensure that ELL-SWDs are flexibly programmed in the least restrictive environment. Our school uses the the full continuum of special education services to ensure that each ELL-SWDs IEP goals are met. Related service providers, special education teachers, and ENL teachers work together to ensure that students are receiving all mandated services in the general education classroom except where the IEP indicates a separate location. Our self-contained and push-in model support our efforts to educate students within the least restrictive environment. SWDs receive ENL instruction according to their language proficiency levels. Entering and Emerging ENL/ Sp Ed students receive 360 minutes of English language instruction a week within the content area of English. During the ELA 90 minute daily block, four times a week, SWDs who are ELLs are pulled for English language services or a certified ENL teacher pushes in to the classroom to deliver ENL instruction. Similarly, students who are at the Transitioning and Expanding level of proficiency receive 180 minutes of instruction weekly and Commanding level ELLs receive 90 minutes of ENL supportive instruction per week. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. P.S. 170 has a wealth of intervention programs for ELL students who need additional academic support. Our newcomers and long-term ELLs are encouraged to attend one of the several after-school Title lll programs that prepare ELLs for state tests. For the 2018-2019 school year, we will continue to implement two intervention/ enrichment programs for grades K-5. One program will be a blended program in which students receive homework help, intervention in math and/ or ELA and participate in an enrichment activity. ENL students who have been receiving services for three or more years who have not met the standards are included in the program. All special education ELLs receive academic intervention services as needed and as dictated by their IEPs. We provide ICT classes for grades K-5, and other related services for students in all grades. Each teacher is trained to implement RTI strategies within the classroom. Teachers in Grades K and 1 will be given four RTI periods per week. Teachers in Grades 2 through 5 will be given five RTI periods per week. Teachers will develop a system to track and evaluate the effectiveness of their RTI instruction and develop on-going mediation as they see fit according to each individual ELL's area of need. Such interventions include but are not limited to "double dosing" Fundations lessons for students struggling with decoding, writing lessons focusing on how to gather details from informational texts, guided reading lessons to improve comprehension , analyzing paired literature passages for cross-text reading responses, and math skills lessons. ELLs who have not been able to meet the performance standard in reading comprehension and writing participate in one-one, pairs, or small group instruction. The reading skills and vocabulary are presented using Science and Social Studies themes. Two years ago, we incorporated a push-in ENL Theatre Arts program which we will continue to have. The students work on plays as a genre and develop their own plays for a performance to help our ELL students with their listening, speaking, 9  reading and writing skills.This year, our ENL students will receive an additional instructional period in writing. The intervention will build general academic and domain-specific language, knowledge of grammatical structures, and provide ample opportunities for writing. Student writing samples will be used on an on-going basis to decide areas needing improvement. Beginner/ entering level newcomers in grades 3-5 will participate in our Innovative and Accelerating ENL Program which is taught by 1 ENL teacher. This is a supplemental program designed to promote the foundations of language acquisition. The teacher uses an intensive ELL literacy program published by Santillana called, "Spotlight". They also receive explicit and systematic phonics instruction using Fundations. Students in the Dual Language Program will receive Bilingual Language Intervention Services within the classroom to strengthen their native tongue in addition to supporting a bilingual, biliterate, and bicultural environment. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? At P.S. 170, we have been implementing the CCLS aligned reading program, ReadyGen for Grades 2-5. After each year of implementation, we evaluate it's effectiveness and appropriateness across each grade level and have decided to make the following changes this year: 1) In kindergarten and first grade we will continue to supplant ReadyGEN with another CCLS aligned literacy curriculum called Journeys. We have found that Journeys is more accessible to students in these grade levels and provides more ELL support. 2) Students in grade 1 will be exposed to the ReadyGEN curriculum at the end of the year so that they will be acclimated to the structure and demands of the curriculum as they enter 2 nd grade. 3) In grades 3-5, teachers will develop lessons using an interactive website called SmartAMP to increase engagement and provide multiple points of entry into content area lessons. 4) We will revisit the ReadyGEN writing portion of the curriculum to add instructional supports for our ELLs, implementing teacher modeling, shared writing, peer teaching, and read alouds. 5) In order to foster more rigorous writing, our Writing class offered to ELL students in Grades 2-5 will concentrate on the development of skills needed for researching, building, organizing, writing, and editing pieces appropriate to task and audience. We will continue to provide our ELL students access to grade-level course content through exposure and development of concepts and skills needed to master the grade-level coursework. Having a high standard for all students including ELLs and former ELLs will help them meet and/or exceed the CCLS. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At P.S. 170, We have discontinued the use of National Geographic's Reach Program for the self-contained ESL classes and no longer use the Treasures Reading Program in non-self-contained ESL classes. These programs lacked the academic rigor expected in the CCLS. In order to expose students to the rigorous demands of the CCLS we have adopted the city-approved, CCLS aligned reading program, ReadyGen for grades 2-5 and Journeys for kindergarten and 1 st grade. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs identified in need of additional support are invited to after-school programs. Invitations are translated into three major languages (Spanish, Chinese, and Arabic) to promote participation. All ELLs participate in ESL Through the Theater Arts and in the annual Cultural Festival where they learn dances from around the world. These two programs take place during school hours. The Cultural Festival dances are taught by visiting teaching artists. Students not only learn how to perform the dances, they also learn about the countries where they originate from. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs are supported with the use of SmartAmp, which allows for web-based lessons and a content delivery platform in which students can engage in collaborative activities, take assessments, view web-based content, and participate in lessons digitally. All of the self-contained ENL classes participate. Due to the success of the use of this technology , in the upcoming school year, 12 classes serving ENLs and former ELLs will participate in using the SmartAmp platform. This web-based platform supports ELLs in that it provides them an alternate means to demonstrate their understanding of a lesson. Lessons can also be tailored to each students needs and language level. For example, teachers can "push" differentiated worksheets on a virtual workspace and provide links to online dictionaries, videos and other reference materials for each student. Materials in students' home languages can also be provided on the platform. Students can access Google Translate within a lesson to get clarification in their native language. Three years ago, the whole staff received training in using SmartBoard Technology. As new teachers join the P.S 170 faculty, they immediately receive SmartAmp training. Teachers learn how to create dynamic, interactive lessons 0  incorporating visual and audio components to support ELLs. Teachers also use mini-laptops during small-group instruction to provide students with access to the Internet to research topics. ELLs in fifth grade are taught how to create presentations using Microsoft PowerPoint. All ELLs have access to Reading A-Z.com and IXL.com at home and in school to practice standards based concepts in literacy and mathematics. Reading A-Z.com has a unique feature which lets students record themselves reading a book. Teachers can listen to the recording and take a running record to note the student's reading behaviors. Every class in kindergarten and 1st grade also has iPads to support ELLs during small group instruction. Teachers research and share applications that promote language acquisition. Teachers and related service providers of ELL-SWDs also use iPads during small group instruction. New instructional materials have been purchased to be used with newcomers in the self-contained classes in grades 1 and 2 beginning September, 2017. These textbooks and workbooks are from Santillana and are entitled, "Spotlight on English" This program is geared for success in literacy and content. It is aligned to the National Curriculum and Content-Area Standards and developed with content-rich texts in science, social studies, math, and the arts. Content-based vocabulary and concepts are developed through theme-based informational and literary texts. Animated recordings of texts, chants, rhymes, dialogues, and thematic picture cards can all be used to enhance the lessons for entering and emergent readers. Furthermore, new reading libraries will be available for use in the self-contained ENL classes in grades 3 and 4. These libraries will introduce students to informational texts featuring informational text features, such as the table of contents, headings, captions, photographs, and glossaries. The informational texts are paired with fables which will expose students to storytelling elements, illustrations, and well-known themes from around the world. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Students have access to one-to-one glossaries for math in Spanish, Chinese, and Arabic during instruction time and for assessments. Bilingual dictionaries are also provided in most of the languages represented in the school including Spanish, Chinese, Arabic, Polish, Greek, Urdu, Russian, and Turkish. Our ENL teachers speak a range of languages including Arabic, Spanish, Russian, Cantonese, and Mandarin. These teachers provide native language support in the beginning of the year to help newcomer students adjust to their new learning environment. The ReadyGen program also provides a list of Spanish cognates for the vocabulary presented in each anchor text. This list is provided to students that are literate in Spanish. Students are also assigned language buddies at the beginning of the year. Dual language students have access to the same support system as well as online language learning apps. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. After the ELL Identification Process, ELL Parents are informed of the ELL Program Options and Parent Surveys are returned, as well as ELL Testing and Data have been completed and reviewed, the ELL subgroups are formed. Then, the required services according to proficiency levels are applied. Students are placed in grades that are age-appropriate. ENL students are grouped by grade and language proficiency levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share a building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the beginning of the school year, a comprehensive kindergarten orientation organized by the Assistant Principal and Parent Coordinator is held to explain the rules, routines, and expectations of the school. There is a special emphasis on helping ELLs orient to their new educational environment. Parents/ Guardians are able to look inside a kindergarten classroom and speak with a kindergarten teacher. Newly enrolled ELLs enrolled throughout the school year participate in the ENL Through the Theater Arts Program to develop literacy skills and accelerate their oral language skills. Every year, the Dean and Parent Coordinator organize a Cultural Festival, in which newly enrolled students participate. Students learn dances and study countries around the world to enrich their background knowledge. This effort is all in part to foster a feeling of community. Families of newly enrolled students also work with the parent coordinator to learn about different community organizations, after school programs, school expectations, and the Common Core Learning Standards. All ENL students are invited to our Annual Family Festival in June which is organized with the help of the Principal, Parent Coordinator, Dean, Assistant Principals, School Counselors and operates with the volunteer work of those previously mentioned, coaches, teachers, and 1  paraprofessionals. At the Family Festival, ELLs and their families are invited to participate in a variety of fun games and a petting zoo. Many of our students interact with animals they have never seen or known of before. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Not applicable 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? In the Dual Program at P.S. 170, a side-by-side, two-way program model is used. One instructional day is taught in English; 100% of the day's instructional coursework is in English. Then, the next instructional day is taught in Mandarin and so on. Each core content area is taught in both English and Mandarin. Therefore, each language is separated by day. English proficient students and English language learners are equally integrated in the classes. 50% of the class' student population is EP and 50% of the class' student population is ELLs. Home language and English language literacy is taught simultaneously. Emergent literacy is developed in the home language and English according to the English language learner common core standards for language acquisition. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The professional development listed is a combination of the regional offerings and our own professional development for ENL and classroom teachers (which is based on the needs of our faculty-as per Jose P.). * September 4 th - NYSITELL Training * September 6th - 20th - Administering and Scoring of the NYSITELL * October 1 st - Pupil Accounting Secretary Training on new ENL mandates * October 1st - Setting Up the ENL Classroom Environment - Part One * October 2nd - Setting Up the ENL Classroom Environment - Part Two * November - TBD - Growing And Showing Our Feelings with Words * December - TBD- Skill Vs. Strategy: Meeting the Academic Demands in Writing with ELLs in Grades 3-5 * January - Date TBD - ENL compliance and instructional considerations * February - Date TBD - ENLs with Disabilities: Identifying the Difference between Language Acquisition and Disability * March - TBD - Helping Newcomer ELLs Access Grade Level Texts * Weekly collective planning across all grades to explore and implement ENL teaching strategies to support academic language development in all skill areas Professional development has been an important and ongoing part of ENL training at P.S. 170 to address the needs of our English language Learners and fulfill the 15% professional development requirement for all teachers and the 50% professional development requirement for ENL teachers. Professional development sessions geared to the needs of our ELLs are attended by the assistant principals, ENL coordinator, common branch teachers, paraprofessionals, ENL teachers, guidance counselors, special education teachers, occupational/physical therapist, speech therapists and parent coordinator. At P.S. 170, our ENL coordinator attends the regional professional development circles and the material is then turn-keyed to the 2  staff. Information and materials from all PD courses are stored in the ENL Coordinator's office in a binder that is accessible to all teachers. All PD attendees are required to turnkey valuable information at faculty conferences and meetings. Following are some examples of the professional development sessions that have been attended by teachers and administrators at our school over the past year: - Fordham University - Literary Institute for Newcomers: Building Oral Language: Listening and Speaking in the Classroom - Fordham University - Working Towards Grade Level Standards: Developing Newcomer Reading and Writing Skills - 20K170 ELL Team Professional Learning - Language Supports and Scaffolds for ELLs at Different Proficiency Levels - 20k170 ELL Team Professional Learning - Using the Common Core Bilingual Progressions to Support the Diverse Needs of ELLs Non-pedagogues are invited to attend workshops at our school on many occasions. Every First Friday of every month, the Parent Coordination provides workshops for non-pedagogues. The following is a list of workshops that are provided this upcoming school year: * How To Support Your ELL At Home * Neighborhood Resources * The Middle School Application Process for ELLs and Their Families * Parent Literacy Workshop * Engaging Story Talk * ELA / Math State Test Workshop for ELL Parents As part of the requirement to maintain a professional teaching license, teachers are expected to keep their own record of the 7.5 hours of ENL training. Teachers are provided a log sheet at the beginning of the year to track their hours of training. The following is a list of workshops that we will continue to provide and/ or expand upon for the upcoming school year: * Recognizing the Differences Between Common ELL Behaviors and SWD Behaviors * Academic Literacy for ELLs Aligned to CCSS: Reading and Writing Informational Text * Building Academic Language in the ENL Classroom * Using ELL Data to Drive Instruction: Incorporating the language of ELA Exams into our Daily ENL Instruction * Effective Strategies and Best Practices for Literacy Instruction and Intervention for ENLs 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We also provide our staff, students and parents with support as the fifth graders transition from elementary school to the middle school environment. We provide our 5th grade students with a push-in program which focuses on life-skills and character development. This program helps the teachers and students who are dealing with some challenging situations which may occur throughout the year. Our guidance counselors provide an at-risk guidance program, both pull-out and push-in, which also helps students cope with these issues. In addition, they provide information, assistance and support for students and parents with the Middle School application process. They communicate with parents during Parent-Teacher conferences, sending e-mails and written correspondence. They encourage parents and students to visit the schools during their Open Houses, to experience the environment of the school. This upcoming year, we will be inviting the fifth grade parents along with the fifth grade students to explain the application process and the Middle School experience. At this meeting, we will be inviting our neighborhood feeder schools to speak with the students and parents about their school and programs available. Our students even take a trip to McKinley Middle School, so the students can experience the middle school environment for themselves. 15% of total hours of ESL training for all staff members including non-ELL teachers will take place during Chancellor's Conference Days and during morning pd sessions as per our school's SBO. The following topics will be addressed: * Understanding the legal documents which identify our ELLs and how we can support our English Language Learners and their families during the initiation into our education system * Exploring ENL strategies and methodologies to support our English Language Learners at each level of second language acquisition * Building Academic Language in the ENL classroom * The use of technology in the classroom and its benefits for our English Language Learners at all stages of development 3  50% of total hours of ELL-specific training for ENL teachers will include workshops on the following topics: * Understanding and analyzing English Language Learners' data from state assessments (NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, ELA and Math yearly assessments) * Understanding the new CR Part 154 guidelines * Teachers will also engage in weekly morning pd where they will conduct student inquiry focused on enhancing ENL instruction and social emotional learning in our ENL population. As part of the requirement to maintain a professional teaching license, teachers are expected to keep their own record of the ENL training that is required under Jose P. Teachers are provided a log sheet at the beginning of the year to track their hours of training. Professional development has been an important and ongoing part of ENL training at P.S. 170. Professional development sessions geared to the needs of our ELLs are attended by the assistant principal, ENL coordinator, common branch teachers, paraprofessionals, ENL teachers, guidance counselors, special education teachers, occupational/physical therapist, speech therapist and parent coordinator. At P.S. 170, our ENL coordinator attends the regional professional development and the material is then turn-keyed to the staff as needed. Materials from all PD courses are stored in the ENL Coordinator and Testing Coordinator's office, in a binder that is accessible to all teachers, and PD attendees are required to turnkey valuable information at faculty conferences and meetings. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Teachers are required to meet with parents during Wednesday mornings to discuss the academic progress of their ENL students in addition to Parent Teacher Conference Days and Evenings. To assist teachers in providing an accurate picture of their student's progress, the ENL coordinator and the Principal provides each teacher with data from ATS, STARS report cards, and other sources, including item analysis spreadsheets for testing grades and ENL rosters with testing information. Teachers use their own grade books to provide pertinent and current assessment grades by subject. Teachers additionally refer to NYSESLAT Modality item analysis reports. Teachers in Grades 3-5 refer to the NYSESLAT Modality Reports and the ELA and Math State Exam Item Analysis Reports. At individual meetings with ELL parents, teachers share the student's individual learning plans which itemize for parents how teachers provide specially designed instruction with appropriate scaffolds for English language development, academic language acquisition and use in all content areas, strengthening of skills for reading and writing improvement, and key use of background and prior knowledge. Teachers show parents how the daily courses of instruction assist students in performing successfully in core content areas. The use of rubrics and specific language learning goals help to clarify the student needs and gains. Paraprofessionals and other school pedagogues assist with translations in Spanish, Arabic, Chinese, and Russian during individual meetings. Parent engagement sessions are tracked using school-based record sheet. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. In the past few years, we have been focusing on increasing our ELL parents' involvement in the school community. In addition, we are continuing our monthly Parents' Reading Program, where our parents are invited into the school on the first Friday of each month to read books to their children. Our parent coordinator, Abigail Figueroa, has been instrumental in developing a multi-cultural and bilingual library so our parents can borrow books to read to their children at home. This year we will continue our parent workshops, which include the following topics: • Quality Healthcare • Learning About the IEP Process • Listening, Reading, Writing, and Speaking strategies at home • Special Education and ELLs: An Overview • Understanding the Middle School Application Process (Grade 5 students and parents) • Cultural Festival / Family Festival Professional Development on Cultural Center Passes-Kindergarten parents were given cultural center passes. We intend to 4  extend professional development to the Kindergarten parents as well as the Kindergarten teachers. This PD will explain how and where to use these passes in order to best serve the needs of our parents and children. Our yearly Family Festival held in the Spring is a huge success. Health organizations, businesses from the community and games for the children help bring our school community together for a fun-filled day. Parents are notified about the events on the school's website and via translated flyers. All the above events and workshops include translations and translators in the three major languages represented in our school, including Chinese, Arabic, and Spanish, to make the information comprehensible for our English Language Learners' parents. All attendance records for these events are maintained by the parent coordinator. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Zhen (Tony) Wu, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Ralph A. Fabrizio School School DBN: 20K170 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Zhen Wu Holli Sainz Title Principal Assistant Principal Abigail Figueroa Parent Coordinator Maria Impagliazzo ENL/Bilingual Teacher Aida Ahmad Parent Sewai Lynch/ ELA Teacher/Subject Area Melanie Fonollosa/ Math Teacher/Subject Area Elen Stratis Laura Mirto Coach Coach Noreen McLaughlin School Counselor Carina Costantino Lucia Medina-Perez Kristi Pollock Lauren Boykin Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Assistant Principal Other Service Provider Vera Efstathiou Other School Counselor Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/09/18 10/09/18 10/09/18 10/09/18 10/09/18 10/09/18 10/09/18 10/09/18 10/09/18 10/09/18 10/09/18 10/09/18 10/09/18 10/09/18 10/09/18 7 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: The Ralph A. Fabrizio School Superintendent: Constantino DBN: 20K170 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Stratis NA coach NA Yes NA Yes NA Elen NA NA NA * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The need assessment was done through the following: a. ATS Home Language Report b. Parent surveys c. PTA meetings 8  d. Conversation with the parent coordinator e. Conversation with the School Assessment Team 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Chinese, Spanish, Arabic, Russian, Ukrainian, Vietnamese, Burmese, Japanese, Albanian, Urdu, Uzbek, Greek, Italian, Serbo-Croatian, Polish and Kabyle NA NA NA 50% 50% 50% 50% NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. NA Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families See school calendar at PS170.com Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The principal will send the documents to the 3 translators for translation. The supervising school aide will have the translated copies made according to the numbers of the students who speak each native language as indicated by ATS. We will continue to translate all important school – family correspondences into the three major languages: Chinese, Arabic, and Spanish. Translation services for other languages will be provided upon request. Besides using the assistance from DoE’s translation unit, we will also use our own staff as well as parent volunteers to translate important 9  school documents. We will establish a record-keeping system to save the translations that would probably be used year after year. This way, we will be more efficient in providing written translation. We will also explore the possibility of utilizing online translation systems to reduce human labor and shorten the translation time. NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? For each major meetings such as PTA meetings and Parent Teacher Conferences, we will use all school aides and para-professionals who speak a native language to assist the teachers in communicating with parents. We also recruit additional translators from the Chinese Planning Council and the neighboring high schools. Family Night - Sept. 17th See the left column Parent-teacher conferences - Nov. 5 th and March 3rd Curriculum Nights Parent engagement sessions on Wednesday mornings Guidance counselor meetings IEP meetings NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Blockboard Phone Message system and website Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure 0  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the September Faculty meeting, all staff will be presented with a copy of the Chancellor's Reg A-663 and informed of all the translation resources available in the school. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Welcome Poster will be posted in the lobby by the parent coordinator. The Parents' Bill of Rights and Parents' Guide to Language Access will be sent home. The Language ID Guide will be posted at the security desk and provided to all the secretarial staff. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Feedback will be gathered monthly by the School Leadership Team (SLT) and Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) and annually with the Parent Survey. 1 
