 20K187 School Name: THE CHRISTA MCAULIFFE SCHOOLI.S. 187 Principal: JUSTIN BERMAN   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: IS 187 Christa McAuliffe 332000010187 6-8 School Number (DBN): 20k187 1171 65 th Street Brooklyn, New York 11219 718-236-3394 718-236-3638 Phone Number: Fax: MInaSadiki wnielso@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Justin Berman Jeffrey Feil VitoLaBella Jeffrey Feil n/a n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 20 Superintendent’s Office Address: Karina Constantino Superintendent: 415 89 th Street Brooklyn, NY 11209 kconstan@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-759-4912 Phone Number: 718-759-4842 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) MauriciereDe Govia FSC: 20 Executive Director:   415 89th Street Brooklyn, New York11209 Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director’s Email Address: mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-759-4862 Fax: 718-759-4842   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Justin Berman Jeffrey Feil Vito LaBella Courtney Bishop John Hederman Scott Scheiner Patricia Pawson *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name Jennifer Kruger LilyTang Effie MacLachlan Anna Pizzelli Jenny Wong Sandra Song WinnieWong Mina Sadiki Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Assistant Principal Member/ Student   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Our school community strives to guide every student as they reach and/or exceed their potential as measured through social, academic, parental and community connections and emotional growth as noted in the Framework for Great Schools. We aim to encourage all students to be visionary, empathetic leaders with a rigorous educational program that fosters their social and emotional development, impassions enthusiastic readers, writers and speakers,   and graduates scholars who explore, investigate, innovate, construct, evaluate, and inspire others to help solve the challenges of the future. Outcomes will include students who graduate from our school with an enhanced thirst for knowledge and who will be equipped to be independent learners and thinkers. The cultivation of this love of learning and respect for the cultural, familial, and personal facets of their lives will extend through their college years, their careers, and beyond. This opportunity for individual growth begins with our academy structure. Each of our three academies emphasizes different academic areas, and the choice process begins for students even before they are enrolled in our school. Students will become well-rounded individuals, experiencing and appreciating the arts, physical activities and of course academic excellence, which engages members of their communities. We strive to make going to school and learning an enjoyable experience for all students and one that results in a lifelong desire to engage in academic and professional endeavors. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our school is a 6-8 middle school. We serve students in District 20 including those students who span the educational spectrum. From some of the most severely disabled children, to accelerated gifted students, and everyone in between, our school community strives to create a nurturing environment where adolescents can foster independence in their learning and thinking. Whether students with disabilities require an Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) class, a self-contained setting, or just occasional supports, our programs are designed to meet the needs of all of our students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. From some of the most severely disabled children, to accelerated gifted students, and everyone in between, our school community strives to create a nurturing environment where adolescents can foster independence in their learning and thinking. Whether students with disabilities require an Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) class, a self-contained setting, or just occasional supports, our programs are designed to meet the needs of all of our students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Supportive Environment : The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. We feel we have addressed these elements of the Framework for Great Schools in many significant ways: This year, we have introduced several new avenues for students to develop their active participation in fostering a supportive and inclusive culture. For example, our student-led online magazine, The Swerve, provides a creative 0  platform for students to express their interests and display their talents. In addition, The Swerve hosted a Talent Show for the performance arts. We also have a team of student government representatives, elected by their peers, to represent them in decision-making and planning at the SLT and beyond. Our club, The Spectrum, is a forum in which all students are welcome to meet, plan and share ideas that concern adolescent life as well as all facets of our school community. Our local chapter of Girls Learn International has evolved into a school-wide endeavor that has reached out to all of our students. We have hosted several school dances that have been organized and hosted by our Student Dance Committee. Our school play, not only engaged a large number of students involved in its production, but also successfully attracted a record number of audience participation. We have created sports teams that have expanded to include both girls and boys basketball teams, as well as continuing with our Young Runners Program. The LINKS program has provided opportunities for our students to make new connections with students with disabilities. The members of our school community, including teachers, administrators, and family members, have devoted their time and talents to help facilitate these programs. Our Inquiry and Teacher Teams have worked collaboratively to identify and focus attention to those students who require enhanced attention. This year, we aim to continue and develop these initiatives by increasing student participation even further. We plan to build on this momentum of inclusion, support, and respect for all. We aim to infuse educational rigor and real-world experiences to integrate with our school's culture of growth, respect, and learning. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K187 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 873 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 57 54 24 23 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 20 7 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 66.0% % Attendance Rate 54.8% % Reduced Lunch 3.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.0% 6.8% 23.9% % Multi-Racial % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.13 2% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 95.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 33 31 15 98.2% 11.1% 11.3% 1.3% 67.5% 0.6% 6 34% 9.5 95.7% 100% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In response to the Framework for Great Schools-Rigorous Instruction, and an analysis of our ELA and Math data our school community strives to guide every student as they reach and/or exceed their potential as measured through academic, social and emotional growth. With the continuation of our targeted and differentiated instruction, students will receive the supports and challenges to help them meet their full potential. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. #1 - By June 2019, the percentage of students in 6th grade who did not achieve a proficient score on the NYS assessment in English Language Arts will increase by at least 5% over the level of proficiency and/or growth level from the 2017-2018 school year. This will be measured by the NY State test in English Language Arts compared to June 2017 achievement. 3 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students: (General Education, ENLs, June 2017-June 2018 Administrators Teacher Leaders Support Staff Professional Trainers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). To further improve school performance and outcomes for all students, we are developing the following initiatives:  Programming to be aligned in order to provide services  to students at risk Flexible Program to support students strengths and areas of focus ICT, Sp. Ed.)  New Teacher hire to ensure program to support identified students  Academic materials/programs to support instructional goals  Teacher Training to implement research based strategies to meet the need of struggling students  Advanced Literacy training and planning to allow all students to effectively communicate and promote the understanding of text for a variety of purposes.  1/3/19 Update: Expansion of sensory room to include Teachers Families Activpanel and additional sensory equipment. Increase our LINKS Program school-wide   1/3/19 Update: LINKS has been so successful that we have had to relocate the group to a larger space. We started this year with 47 students (12 SWD and 35 GE students) We now 86 students (26 SWD and 60 GE students) with 32 GE students on our waiting list.  A LINKS club member is a student volunteer who provides peer to peer support to a student with a disability under adult supervision. LINKS club members are selected after an application and interview process. LINKS club members must be in the 6th, 7th, and 8th grade LINKS Club members must have 2 teacher recommendations to participate in the program. Students will participate in a program one day a week for one hour after school, to learn about students with disabilities and about their link partner. Students will eat lunch once a week with their LINKS member from the   4 special education program. The goal is to socialize and increase the independence of students.   Newsela has been purchased for use by all teachers. This Students: web-based resource provides assessments, differentiated materials, and data collection capabilities.  Newela provides up-to-date non-fiction authentic articles that reflect the news in real time. As such, it provides a critical component to social studies and science classes, as well as to our language arts programs.  Newsela also contains a database of primary sources, novel-ties, multicultural connections and classic materials.  Codex ELA Curriculum for Self-Contained Classes and  Advanced Literacy Techniques Social Studies Curriculum for Self-Contained Classes: American Story and Access textbooks (ENLs, ICT, Sp. Ed. Gifted) Teachers Families  ery Education on-line science textbooks have been Students: purchased for 7th and 8th grade classes. This tool also provides enrichment activities that supplement instruction for our special needs population.  ery Streaming Services have been purchased for all students and supplements each curricular area.  National Geographic Social Studies curriculum resources for all special needs classes (ENLs, ICT, Sp. Ed. Gifted) Teachers Families June 2017- June 2018 Administrators Teacher Leaders Support Staff Professional Trainers June 2017- June 2018 Administrators Teacher Leaders Support Staff Professional Trainers Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. As stated, the are of focus for our struggling students will continue to facilitate continuous communication and feedback to all members of the school community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 5  New Hire (see above) Teacher Program (see above) Student Programs (see above) Newsela (see above) Discovery Education (see above) Chrome Book purchase Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. School leadership, along with the school leadership team, will continuously review the progress towards meeting goals and revise action plans when necessary during our scheduled monthly meetings beginning in September 2017. Staff training for initiatives will commence in September 2018 to be provided by Teacher Leaders and Steering Committee. Pre and Post assessments will be designed and administered Data review, as available from G-Suite, Newsela, Discovery and, will be conducted monthly via teacher team and department meetings. Professional development for new resources will be provided on an as-needed basis. 6  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teacher-Parent Conferences - attendance School Leadership Team Agendas Teacher Team Meetings Units of Study Parent Teacher Association meeting monthly - attendance Parent emails Thursday Parent Meeting logs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In response to the Framework for Great Schools-Supportive Environment, we have decided to further our efforts to nurture the social and emotional development of all of our student To develop a heightened sense of self-awareness and reflection, we are cultivating a supportive environment while guiding students to become independent and responsible for their learning. Likewise, we are developing systems and structures to enhance teacher reflections with respect to individual student potential and growth. To this end, we are implementing continuous formative and summative assessments throughout all content areas, as well as including personality and interest inventories, and opportunities for small group dynamics. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. #2-By June 2019, all teachers and school leaders will collaborate to develop and nurture the social and emotional development of all of our students. These would include, but not be limited to evaluating all available data, both objective and soft data. In addition to standardized test scores and benchmarks, these include such measures as student self-assessments, anecdotal records, formative assessments, student surveys, personality and interest inventories. The goal will be measured by staff meetings, professional development opportunities and inquiry groups minutes. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Staff will have common planning time, and school based professional development to collaborate on designing and refining units of study. These would include across-grade collaborations, as well as interdepartmental conversations. Staff will inform parents of upcoming units and instructional information bi-weekly Staff Families     During scheduled weekly teacher collaboration meetings, using G-Suite, etc.  During Academy Preps staff will discuss the social emotional needs of their students and address concerns through training and guidance  During scheduled Inquiry time focused on social emotional development of all students and receive training to support their work  Principal and staff will continue to engage in and provide  continuous training regarding the social and emotional development of adolescents Social Emotion Learning Pilot Program: Teachers will work as a team to develop and implement social emotional lessons designed to meet the needs of our student population.  Update 1/3/19: Team sent for RULER training to increase awareness and turnkey SEL information to staff (see SEL Pilot)  Update 1/3/19: Advanced Literacy through Oracy Pilot Program to increase students oral communication skills while maintaining sensitivity to their social emotional needs. Students will communicate effectively using oracy skills focusing on individual levels and providing experiences for students in various situations (i.e., individual conversations, small group talk, whole class presentations, school assembly presentations, talks in front of cameras.  Update 1/3/19: Inter-academy homeroom was established allowing selected students from all three academies to take a leadership role within the school, planning activities, fundraisers, and other community related events. June 2018-June 2019 School Leadership and Administrators SLT Student Government Guidance counsellors SAPIS Support Staff Parent Coordinator Student Intervention Teams Behavior Mediator 9  Student designed clubs will continue to be established to support students interests and emotional needs. Ji Mentors: Peer to Peer Mentoring Program o o Spectrum: LGBTQ support o SPARX: Student Leadership o Links: Supporting Students with Special Needs o GLI : Human Rights Worldwide o Swerve student online magazine  Teachers will engage in on-going data evaluations and Staff peer conferences in order to develop and refine student-needs profiles. Students  Teachers will develop instruments by which to guide students in the development and refinement of student goals and action plans for personal academic and social-emotional growth.  Periodic evaluations will be administered to students that would measure individual achievement.  An analysis of the evaluations will result in differentiated goals that will meet and challenge the specific needs of individual students.  Teachers will receive professional learning on utilizing problem centered learning techniques through the lens of social and emotional learning to promote student engagement. Sept 2018-June 2019 School Leadership and Administrators SLT Student Government Guidance counsellors SAPIS Support Staff Parent Coordinator Student Intervention Teams Behavior Mediator 0 October 2018- June 2019 School Leadership and Administrators Staff, Students Families        Students will be engaged in a process of self-reflection and evaluation. This will include academic as well as social/emotional needs. Students will identify their specific areas of strength, as well as areas requiring further improvement. Students will be guided in the development and use of rubrics when assessing their work. Students will actively participate in the identification and setting of their individualized goals. Students will be guided in the process of developing individualized action plans for achieving their specific goals (both academic and social/emotional). Students will be provided opportunities to confer with guidance counsellors, SAPIS workers, Behavior Mediation Specialist and school psychologist. Students will be given the opportunity to develop skills necessary for college and career readiness. SLT Student Government Guidance counsellors SAPIS Support Staff Parent Coordinator Student Intervention Teams Behavior Mediator School Leadership and Administrators SLT Student Government Guidance counsellors Teachers will engage families and share the individualized goals and action plans Staff, Students, Families October 2018-June 2019  During Parent/Teacher conferences  During Thursday afternoon (parent contact time)  Weekly Inquiry Team Meetings   G-Suite  Via Progress Reports  SEL Pilot Program Review Families will be invited to review, collaborate and advise revisions to student goals and action plans.  Pupil Path anecdotal  Staff SEL training and inquiry team focus 1  SAPIS Support Staff Parent Coordinator Student Intervention Teams Behavior Mediator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. As stated, the use of technology will facilitate continuous communication and feedback among all members of the school community to aid in the support and care for their children at home. Parent contact meetings, PTC conferences, electronic communications, etc. will be employed by all teachers and school leaders in a timely manner. Thursday afternoons have been dedicated for family communications and conferences. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SLT meeting monthly Inquiry Meetings (weekly and ongoing)  Teacher Parent Communication school schedule SBO vote    PTA meeting monthly  Weekly Inquiry Team Meetings  Community Assistant (Chinese Translation)  Pupil Path  Common prep periods for staff to meet and collaboration to occur  After-school programs funded through NIA to offer enrichment, remediation, STEM  Materials purchased to support goal expectation, such as Scantron data analysis program to allow teacher instant data to inform instruction Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. September 2018 - Develop and administer initial assessments   Curriculum Night - Introduction to academic expectations  October 2018 - Review and analysis of assessments  October 2018 through December 2018- Review, plan and implement progress towards goal completion  November - Parent Teacher Conference -- sharing  Mid-year assessments -- midterms   April 2019 - Review data and determine the effectiveness  May 2019-June-2019-Purchasing, Programming based upon results of all assessments administered and February 2019 - Re-evaluation of progress towards annual goal modify and adjust if necessary triangulated  Parent meetings and workshops will be conducted throughout the school year on the designated parent communication sessions  On-going monitoring of progress via G-Suite and Pupil Path  Weekly Inquiry Team Meetings Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student self-assessments - survey & goal sheets Report cards Pupil Path Progress Reports (3 times annually) Inquiry Team portfolios Instructional team surveys Parent-Teacher Conference notes Participation in extra-curricular activities Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In order to continue to develop, refine and deliver rigorous instruction to our ever-changing student population, which is expanding in its scope to include: gifted education, ICT classes, self-contained special education, as well as our ACES program (Academic, Career and Essential Skills program ), we have been reflecting on our professional needs. We will continue to expand and develop the expertise, materials and training of our staff in order to meet the demands of our all of our students as they are reflected in our changing population. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. #3-By June 2019, there will be a 70% increase in the development of teacher training and collaboration to support the needs of our changing population so that all students will receive appropriate quality and rigorous instruction. This will be measured by staff professional development sessions, inquiry group meeting and teacher common planning time 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional Administrators Supervisors UFT Teacher Center School Leadership Team   development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In a concerted effort meet the needs of our growing ICT and self-contained programs, we expect to continue with the following adjustments: All teachers and staff, including paraprofessionals Sept. 2018 - June 2019  Teacher training, supported, in part via the UFT Teacher Center, will be provided to meet the needs of general ed and special ed teachers  Teacher training, with respect to gifted education, will continue to be provided to all relevant staff  Teachers will meet regularly to review and refine IEPs, teaching strategies, and data evaluations  Teachers will engage in the sharing of best-practices through collaborative conferences, professional development, inter-visitations and self-reflections  Targeted reading and/or math instruction will be provided for students struggling within the ICT classes  1/3/19 Update: Advanced Literacy training and planning to allow all students to effectively communicate and promote the understanding of text for a variety of purposes.  1/3/19 Update: Problem-Centered Learning approach to planning and implementation of lessons to further engage students by promoting an active approach to learning through the inquiry process that focuses on real world engagement while connecting to the "WHY" around all areas of instruction.  1/3/19 Update: Increase student oral communication skills while maintaining sensitivity to their social emotional needs. Students will communicate effectively using oracy skills focusing on individual levels and providing experiences for students in various situations (i.e., individual conversations, small group talk, whole class presentations, school assembly presentations, talks in front of cameras. ICT teachers will be assigned according to subject, thereby providing specific alignment within the content areas  5   Inquiry Teams will be designed so as to maximize collaborations among teacher-teams tailored to the specific needs of our students  1/3/19 Update: Expansion of sensory room to include Activpanel and additional sensory equipment.  In order to meet the needs of our expanding self-contained special education classes, we propose the following: All teachers and staff, including paraprofessionals Sept. 2018 - June 2019  Teacher training, supported via the UFT Teacher Center, will be provided to meet the needs of general ed and special ed teachers  Teacher collaborations: teachers will meet regularly to review and refine IEPs, teaching strategies, and data evaluations  Teachers will engage in the sharing of best-practices through collaborative conferences, professional development, intervisitations and self-reflections  Targeted reading and/or math instruction will be   provided for students struggling within the special education class Inquiry Teams will be designed so as to maximize collaborations among teacher-teams In order to meet the needs of our S.W.E.E.T. program, we will continue to develop our professional development to meet the needs of our intellectually disabled students. All teachers and staff, including paraprofessionals Sept. 2018 - June 2019  Teachers will engage in training, peer-coaching and collaborations to develop instructional refinements  Teachers will engage in the development of students' life skills and career readiness by participating in community-based opportunities.  Renovation of our student centered coffee shop to enhance the students real world experience  In order to meet the demands of teaching our gifted and talented population, we will continue to implement and expand the following: All teachers and staff, including paraprofessionals Sept. 2018 - June 2019  Teacher training and professional development, supported & provided by the UFT Teacher Center, will be offered to teachers across the content areas  Teacher collaborations: teacher-team meetings that include, but are not limited to Departmental Meetings, Inquiry Teams and Academy Preps  Use of common prep time for sharing best practices, looking at student work and curriculum refinement Administrators Supervisors UFT Teacher Center School Leadership Team Administrators Supervisors UFT Teacher Center School Leadership Team Administrators Supervisors UFT Teacher Center 6  Data collection and evaluation: Using data effectively to determine targeted instruction for challenging our gifted and talented students School Leadership Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. As stated above we will use the technology platform of Pupil Path, G-Suite, and parent conferences to share and enhance our school/ home connection. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teacher Parent Communication school schedule SBO vote SLT meeting monthly   PTA meeting monthly  Weekly Inquiry Team Meetings  Community Assistant (Chinese Translation)  Pupil Path  UFT Teacher Center resources  Common prep periods for staff to meet and collaboration to occur  After-school programs funded through NIA to offer enrichment, remediation, STEM  Materials purchased to support goal expectation, such as Scantron data analysis program to allow teacher instant data to inform instruction o G-Suite o NewsELA o Pupil Path Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. --September-October: Needs assessment for PD administered to staff, analyzed by Cabinet --Peer Inquiry Team assignments 7  --October-December: PD calendar distribution and sign-up --Peer Coaching Calendar --UFT TC Professional Learning Institutes --DOE PD Opportunities --January - April: Review Professional Learning Experiences (reflection & planning) --Set up new Professional Learning Cycle & opportunities --April - June: Review & sharing of professional learning and sharing of best practices Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Calendar of Professional Learning Surveys Danielson teacher evaluations Impact on student learning: -- Looking at Student Work -- Classroom visits -- Performance assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Schools leaders, along with the entire school community, are committed to providing an environment that fosters the professional growth of teachers and staff, along with developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. As noted in our NYC School Survey we will continue to maintain and foster self-respect and respect for all is an essential component of developing the middle school student's personal responsibility and character. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. #4- By June 2019, 100% of the school community will participate in Google classroom/G-Suite and Pupil Path. School leaders, in particular, will integrate our school's newest technology to help further our vision, with clear expectations, support, and organization for our staff and student growth and development. This will be measured by professional development sessions and teacher team meeting minutes. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  G-Suite has been purchased in order to facilitate support and instruction.  Purchase Pupil Path in order to facilitate effective teacher, student and home connection.  Professional development will be provided throughout the year to develop the expertise of use.  Administrators will continuously collaborate and interact with teachers and staff to develop and refine instruction Families, students, teachers, administration, support personnel   We will continue with our Inter-visitations with other schools in order to share and integrate best practices. School leaders will employ G-Suite to share feedback and provide support throughout the observation process. School leadership will use G-Suite as one of the tools to nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff.   The PTA raised money to help the school achieve its goal of having a computer cart in every class. Administrators will contribute to the climate of trust and responsibility via:  Principal participation in the district-wide Families, students, teachers, administration, support personnel social/emotional training program Implementing systems & Structures Shared decision-making Instructional Teams   Cabinet Meetings    Calibration for fair evaluations  Open dialogue with teachers  Reviewing teacher-feedback  Team building activities  Responsiveness to teacher requests  Clear instructional expectations  Constructive feedback (giving & receiving)  Scheduling events, exams, etc. Sept. 2018 -- June 2019 Families Administrators Teachers Support personnel (guidance counsellors, SAPIS, behavior mediation specialist, etc.) Sept. 2018-- June 2019 Families Administrators Teachers Support personnel (guidance counsellors, SAPIS, behavior mediation specialist, etc.) 0  • 1/3/19 Update: Advanced Literacy training and planning to allow all students to effectively communicate and promote the understanding of text for a variety of purposes using Google Classroom and other resources. • 1/3/19 Update: Problem-Centered Learning approach to planning and implementation of lessons to further engage students by promoting an active approach to learning through the inquiry process that focuses on real world engagement while connecting to the "WHY" around all areas of instruction using Google Classroom and other resources. • 1/3/19 Update: Increase student oral communication skills while maintaining sensitivity to their social emotional needs. Students will communicate effectively using oracy skills focusing on individual levels and providing experiences for students in various situations (i.e., individual conversations, small group talk, whole class presentations, school assembly presentations, talks in front of cameras using Google Classroom and other resources. 1/3/19 Update: Students will be expected to contribute to the climate of our school community and make real world connections using various purchases for research, planning, and communication. Families, students, teachers, administration, support personnel Sept. 2018 -- June 2019 Families Administrators Teachers Support personnel (guidance counsellors, SAPIS, behavior mediation specialist, etc.) Families, students, teachers, administration, support personnel Sept. 2018 -- June 2019 Students Families Administrators Teachers Support personnel (guidance counsellors, SAPIS, behavior mediation specialist, etc.) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School leaders will effectively engage families by continuing to develop the lines of communication, establishing and maintaining trust and transparency, assisting and guiding families as needs arise. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1   Teacher Parent Communication school schedule SBO vote SLT meeting monthly   PTA meeting monthly  Weekly Inquiry Team Meetings  Community Assistant (Chinese Translation)  Edline  UFT Teacher Center resources  Common prep periods for staff to meet and collaboration to occur  After-school programs funded through NIA to offer enrichment, remediation, STEM  Materials purchased to support goal expectation, such as Scantron data analysis program to allow teacher instant data to inform instruction Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teacher feedback via informal and formal observations Initial planning conferences (September) End of year conferences (June) Mid-year post-observation conferences January - April: Inquiry Teams - reflection & needs assessment, including student self-assessments April - June: Reviewing, revisiting & planning Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Evaluating report cards -- goals, behavior, and academic achievement Attendance, promptness Participation in school wide events Parent - Teacher conferences (attendance & feedback) Administration: teacher planning conferences and year-end conferences 2  Post observation conferences Instructional Teams - candid dialogue & open participation (attendance) School Leadership Team (parent feedback & student advisory Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In response to the Framework for Great Schools, as well as feedback from our most recent Learning Environment Survey, we have decided to review and strengthen our parent and community outreach systems. Continuing to foster strong family/community relationships will strengthen both the academic and social emotional needs of our students. Our school community strives to guide every student as they reach and/or exceed their potential as measured through social, academic, and emotional growth. Increasing the meaningful conversations with families will allow for additional targeted interventions and supports for all students. With the continuation of our targeted instruction, the Inquiry Teams will include parents as a part of the academic and social emotional planning for our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. #5 By June 2019, all teachers and school leaders will continue to build strong family ties that will result in an 25% increase in family communication with the school community as measured by parent/teacher conferences, including phone conferences and electronic communications. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? We will work to strengthen our community by: Families & students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Administration  Providing support-personnel that would include: behavior mediation specialist (AKA dean), guidance counsellor, SAPIS, school psychologist.  The school will continue its current collaboration with the Community Service Network (NIA). NIA provides after-school services to schools and families to enrich the current curriculum. The program also allows for students to participate in multiple field trips and community outreach services. NIA provides on site staff to assist families and the school community with the development of programs to support all students and families.  Bi-Monthly communications to parents from teachers offering parents and opportunity to understand and engage with the class content and goals with their children. We will renew Pupilpath, as well as continue to implement G-Suite, to be used as communication tools. These platforms will enable us to communicate student progress, grades, notifications, etc. The list below details the usage and necessary tools included within the systems.  Translation services in all languages to enable all parents to have access to information  Academic communication regarding homework, class work and the posting of individual class information  Provide assessments and feedback  Progress reports printed quarterly  School information regarding school events and daily information will be readily available. Teachers Support personnel Security teams School Safety Committee Cabinet School Leadership Team Parent coordinator PTA Families & students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Administration Teachers Support personnel Security teams School Safety Committee Cabinet School Leadership Team 5  Surveys for students, parents and staff to assess school systems’ effectiveness with respect to organizing effective parent teacher conferences  Teacher email communications with students and  parents regarding student progress and/or assignments Invite parents to participate in classroom presentations related to subject matter We will endeavor to build strong relationships and collaborations with all parents and members of the school community to ensure families take an active role within our school community.  PTO members will actively plan with school leadership and participate with the incoming student orientations.  We will ensure that all parents/families are informed and trained in accessing these platforms, including the setting up of user names and passwords.  PTO will survey staff and students regarding planning for   and organizing school assemblies and trips. Staff and PTO will plan, fund and participate in field trips to enrich all content instruction. School Leadership Team will actively discuss school initiatives and become active participants within the school community.  PTO and staff will actively plan and participate with school fundraisers to fund multiple school projects and resources. Parent coordinator PTA Families & students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Administration Teachers UFT Teacher Center Support personnel Cabinet School Leadership Team Parent coordinator PTA Families & students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Administration School leadership and staff will actively plan individual parent meetings as well as communicate with parents in order to provide the necessary individualized academic and social emotional information for all families. The information detailed below will allow for additional academic interventions and/or services to be provided in a timely fashion:  Planning for the four Parent-Teachers conferences to provide parents with all the information necessary to communicate with the school and discuss individualized student needs  During weekly parent communication sessions, staff will make appointments with families so as to discuss students who are at risk, and together will create an action plan for success. Staff will email families and provide them with information regarding upcoming curriculum expectations and assignments.  Teachers UFT Teacher Center Support personnel Cabinet School Leadership Team Parent coordinator PTA 6  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. NIA Community Services Network will support our efforts with increasing community engagement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teacher Parent Communication school schedule SBO vote SLT meeting monthly   PTA meeting monthly  Weekly Inquiry Team Meetings  Community Assistant (Chinese Translation)  Edline  UFT Teacher Center resources  Common prep periods for staff to meet and collaboration to occur  After-school programs funded through NIA to offer enrichment, remediation, STEM  Materials purchased to support goal expectation, such as Scantron data analysis program to allow teacher instant data to inform instruction Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. September 2018 - Develop and administer initial assessments   Curriculum Night - Introduction to academic expectations  October 2018 - Review and analysis of assessments  October 2018 through December 2017 - Review, plan and implement progress towards goal completion  November - Parent Teacher Conference -- sharing    April 2019 - Review data and determine the effectiveness  May 2019-June-2019 - Purchasing, Programming based upon results of all assessments administered and January 2019 - Refinement of safety protocols, where necessary February 2019 - Re-evaluation of progress towards annual goals; modify and adjust if necessary triangulated Student Goals- Will be implemented via online survey and monitored quarterly through out the school year.   Parent meetings and workshops will be conducted throughout the school year during designated parent communication sessions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher-team agendas Inquiry Teamwork & portfolios 7  Student reflections & surveys Benchmark results Goal setting by students Teacher evaluation feedback Attendance at Parent-Teacher conferences Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) NYSexams scores Lexilelevel below grade level Difficulty answering higher order questions Decreased fluency Poor decoding and use of context clues for vocabulary Difficulty writing responses Poor classroom assessment results NYSexam scores Functioning below grade level upon Ten Marksassessment and classroom assessments Decreased fluency in math computation and unable to create Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Reading comprehension, writing instruction, vocabulary development. Includes, but is not limited to Newsela and Get-A-Clue Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group instruction, including one-to-one conferencing with one or more teachers Peer tutoring is available When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Teacher directed instruction provided during the 50-minute Enrichment period, which is during the school day NIA after school program Peer-tutoring – during the school day Math – skill building Small group instruction, including one-to-one conferencing with one or more teachers Teacher directed instruction provided during the 50-minute Enrichment period, which is during the school day Peer tutoring is available NIA after school program 9 a plan to solve word problems Difficulty in following and using formulas Poor classroom assessments Social Studies – skill building: Difficulty completing classroom procedures Literacy integration – including Tiers 2 & 3 vocabulary Peer-tutoring – during the school day Small group instruction, including one-to-one conferencing with one or more teachers Peer tutoring is available Teacher directed instruction provided during the 50-minute Enrichment period, which is during the school day Peer-tutoring – during the school day Difficulty following oral and verbal directions Difficulty using scientific tools NYSexams scores Lexilelevel below grade level Difficulty answering higher order questions Decreased fluency Poor decoding and use of context clues for vocabulary Difficulty writing responses Poor classroom assessment results Guidance Counselor Social Studies – skill building: Literacy integration – including Tiers 2 & 3 vocabulary Small group instruction, including one-to-one conferencing with one or more teachers Peer tutoring is available Teacher directed instruction provided during the 50-minute Enrichment period, which is during the school day Peer-tutoring – during the school day Guidance Counselor Guidance Counselor Guidance Counselor Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) School Psychologist School Psychologist School Psychologist School Psychologist SAPISworker SAPISworker SAPISworker SAPISworker IEPTeacher IEPTeacher IEPTeacher IEPTeacher 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. n/a Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We do not have any students in Temporary Housing. We do not have any students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 3  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 4  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Christa McAuliffe Middle School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Christa McAuliffe Middle School, will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 6  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 7  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Christa McAuliffe Middle School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 8  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 9  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 0  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 1  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 20 School Name The Christa McAuliffe School Borough Brooklyn School Number 187 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Justin Berman Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Lucy Lopez Teacher/Subject Area James Coccar, Social Studies Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider JoAnn Gasser Superintendent Karina Constantinos Assistant Principal Lisa Forsyth Coach N/A School Counselor Melissa Domazetovski Parent Vito LaBella Parent Coordinator Carla Palumbo Field Support Center Staff Member Lucia Perez-Medina Other (Name and Title) Paula Levental ENL Teacher C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 3  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 874 Total number of ELLs 29 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.32% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school utilizes three computer assisted instructional programs with all students to develop their listening, reading and writing skills in ELA. These programs are called Achieve 3000 - TeenBiz, NEWSELA and Get- A- Clue. Achieve 3000 (TeenBiz) is a program in which students are assessed to determine their current reading comprehension level for non-ficition text. The students take a level set to determine their placement in this highly prescribed program. The students work weekly on at least 2 articles in school that are assigned by their teachers. At the end of each reading, the students take an assessment and complete a written extension activity.The Get-a-Clue program is a vocabulary based program in which students are assigned to a level to learn 10 new words each week. This program enhances the student's learning of the necessary vocabulary to understand complex text in their daily school activities.The data for our sixth graders is limited in that this is their first year using this program. The data shows that while they are in the sixth grade, students with disabilities are functioning significantly 4  below their peers within our school population. We find that our ELL students enjoy working with these programs and have shown progress in their reading and writing skills based on these programs. Students move up on the lexile levels as the program assess individual student's progress and moves them accordingly. Initial groupings are based on NYSESLAT scores. Throughout the school year teachers monitor student progress utilizing classroom tests and performance on the computer-based programs listed above. Information from the EDAT is also used to help in planning instruction. In reviewing the data incoming sixth grade students, seventh grade students and eighth grade students scored low in the writing modality of the NYSESLAT. This year teachers will continue their focus on writing through the use of the previously mentioned programs and classroom activities such as writing journals. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? ENL teachers meet with their co-teachers once per 6 day cycle to plan lessons and asses student progress. Teachers also meet by grade/subject area to review student work and to plan future lessons to support ELL students in their classes. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? General EducationWe use the data from all state standardized tests as one source of information. All of our students are currently working with either Achieve3000 or NEWSELA, which are web-based reading and writing programs that deliver differentiated instruction using non-fiction material. All students use an online vocabulary enrichment program entitled, “Get a Clue”. The students find these programs to be challenging and enjoyable. Students progress through this web based program at their individual level as determined by their progress as shown by their percentage of correct responses. The teachers monitor this program to see how long the students work during each session to be certain that the students are using the program as it is intended to be used. Benchmark assessments are created by the specific subject area team and administered to the students at the beginning of the school year. Data is collected from our scantron system. The data shows specific areas of difficulty for the students in that specific subject area. Groupings/lessons are created based on analysis of this data. In our special education program we have studnets who take the NYS ELA and Math exams as well as the NYSAA. In conjunction with the special education teacher, the ENL teacher develops goals on the child’s IEP that will strengthen their ability to develop their language skills in English. These goals focus on the four components of the NYSESLAT test in an attempt to develop our four components of the English skills for the individual child. Data from the NYSESLAT is used when writing students IEP's and goals. This data helps to drive instruction in all areas. Progress is measured based on performance in classroom and as prescribed on their IEP goal. Progress monitoring is based on what is delineated on the students' IEP goals. Exmples of progress monitoring would student work samples, performance on classroom tests and/or performance on class projects and presentations. According to this year's NYSESLAT Data, writing is an area of need in all three grades. In the eighth grade speaking, reading and listening are also areas of need with emphasis place on speaking. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? ENL teachers meet with their co-teachers once per 6 day cycle to plan lessons and asses student progress. Teachers also meet by grade/subject area to review student work and to plan future lessons to support students in their classes. During these planning sessions teachers discuss the effectiveness of the planned interventions . Adjustments are made as needed. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We do not have students in grades K-5. 5  6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. All students who are being served by the ENL teachers were students with disabilities. These students are students with learning disabilities in the Transitioning and Commanding level of proficiency, while our Entering and Emerging students are students with significant cognitive delays. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Data regarding student performance on state exams is shared at both department and Inquiry Group meetings. When available, the data also includes student performance on class assignments and teacher assessments and assigned projects. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The students who take the NYS ELA and Math exams are generally at the transitioning and commanding level of ENL functioning. They will receive 3 to 5 periods of ENL support within their ELA classroom by the licensed ENL teacher in a blended model of co-teaching. These students will receive their support within the classroom setting and the lessons will be co-taught using an ENL methodology. Number of periods is determined by their proficiency level on the NYSESLAT. For students in our NYSAA program, they will receive 5 periods of ELA/ENL co-teaching by a licensed Special Education teacher and a licensed ENL teacher. They will also receive stand-alone ENL instruction, based on need determined by their proficiency level on the NYSESLAT, by the same ENL teacher. If students outside of our NYSAA program require stand alone ENL periods this will be programmed into their schedule. Prior to the school year beginning, ENL stand alone periods are scheduled at a time where students have minor classes so that they are not missing major subject content. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? After reviewing the records of our current ELLs as well the incoming sixth graders, a program is designed to meet the needs of each group of students to include the co-teaching aspect as well as the stand alone aspect of ENL services. Students who are at the Entering and Emerging proficiency levels are given access to home language materials during ENL periods. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 6  All students are participating in Common Core Instructional programs within our school. All subject area teachers are using ENL methodology during their classroom instructional time with their classes. During co-teaching periods, the ENL teacher works closely with the subject area teacher. Both teachers are responsible for delivering instruction. The ENL teacher may offer small group instruction as needed and supports the learning in the classroom. During stand alone periods the ENL teacher provides a variety of teaching strategies to address the multiple levels within the classroom. Students are broken up into groups and receive access to materials at their instructional level. All instruction, in all ENL models, is given in English only. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Children who currently have Alternate Placement Paraprofessionals will be provided instructional support within the classrooms by their bilingual paraprofessional. Each year, it is reviewed to determine if the child still needs the continued support of the paraprofessional in the classroom. If it is determined that they child no longer needs this support, additonal assessments are done to make that final determination through the School Assessment Team based on the dominant language of the individual child. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We do not have SIFE students this year. If we do receive a SIFE student we would review records to place student according to their last level before interruption of service occurred. If student does not have a prior level of service or administration of NYSITELL on record, one would be administered to determine level of service needed to support the student. All students in the ENL programs are evaluated by the ENL teacher and students are placed into the appropriate instructional group for classroom instruction. The ENL teachers are available to meet with the subject content area specialists to assist them in developing lessons that are both challenging and meet the students' instructional needs. Teachers meet weekly to discuss individual students and their needs within the classroom setting. Strategies are developed to meet their needs and to assess what we need to do to move them closer to English language proficient. Differentiation is key in addressing the individual needs of students at each level of English language development. For students who have recently tested out of the ENL program, we provide support to the teachers of these students as well as provide test modifications to allow students to continue to develop the English language within an education that is rigorous for all students attending our school. These students receive 3 periods of co-teaching support within the ELA classroom to maintain and meet the challenges within the general education classroom. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We use Scholastic Code X reading program for our students who are deficient in their reading and writing abilities. This program developed their English language skills of reading, writing, speaking and listening. The ENL teacher specialist works with the special education teacher specialists to develop programs that meet the needs of their students. Curriculum mapping and interdisciplinary units of study are discussed with the ENL teacher specialist so that a connection can be made in the ENL class. Vocabulary is reinforced in all subject area disciplines. The art and technology teachers work closely with the teachers to facilitate the implementation of the study units with projects in their subject discipline to tie it all together. In the special education classroom, we recognize: 7  The alternate placement within special education classes is an on-going process. Students who require bilingual services are granted an ISP (Interim Service Plan) for the use of alternate placement paraprofessionals. These paraprofessionals assist the students in the educational process by providing these students with the necessary translations from English to their native language . These paraprofessionals receive training given by the ESL/ENL teacher specialist and special education teacher specialists to enhance and reinforce the learning of the English language learners using ENL strategies. The paraprofessionals will provide the students with the support required to meet their individual needs. The students are monitored to determine that the services granted under the ISP are appropriate. If it is determined that the services are no longer needed, the services can be removed from the child’s IEP. This is based on the student's language ability in English and a determination is made in conjunction with the child's parents. When an ELL student is due for an annual review, we make a determination as to the level of the English language deficiency and decide whether it is a cognitive learning issue or a language based issue. Based on this annual evaluation, we establish a language goal to be entered on their IEP for the upcoming year. Parents receive four progress reports annually along with their child’s report card. This progress report alerts that parents to the observations of the teachers in achieving this goal during this year of instruction. All students have access to all after school programs regardless of their status as an ELL or former ELL. Many of the students who are identified for these programs are identified due to their need for additional support in the area of written communication. We have attempted to address the needs of these students by providing Academic Intervention Services (AIS) during the school day and in our after school program. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The students are placed into classes within the academies. Co-teaching of entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding and commanding students take place within the classroom during ELA and other content areas where permitted. Students will be scheduled to receive targeted interventions during the school day. All students are given the opportunity to participate in the Title III After-School program, the focus of this program is to increase the speaking, listening, reading and writing ability of the ELLs in our school. We will have an after-school program for our current students for two hours on Monday and one and a half-hour 3 days (Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday) focusing on language skills and vocabulary in the content areas of science and social studies. On Monday and Tuesday, the students will focus on public speaking and listening skills. On Wednesday, the students will focus on reading non-fiction and writing persuasive essays. On Thursday, academic vocabulary (non-fiction) will be the focus and students will use the on-line resource of Get a Clue as well as other already-purchased materials to enhance their listening, speaking, reading and writing vocabulary. The teacher will be meeting with the general education and special education teachers to determine the focused language vocabulary for the upcoming weeks so that it can be supplemented in the after-school program. Students will have a deeper understanding of the vocabulary and be able to particpate fully in the classroom lessons throughout their school day. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All services in our building are provided in English or support is provided by alternate bilingual placement paraprofessionals. Interventions for ELLs in ELA, math and other content areas are built in to the instruction and accommodations are made by the ENL instructor to meet student need. This year we will begin using Recipe for Reading, multi-sensory reading instruction program, to support students functioning at the Entering or Emerging levels. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The Words and Their Stories/Get-a-Clue program is a vocabulary based program in which students are assigned to a level to learn 10 new words each week. This program enhances the student's learning of the necessary vocabulary to understand complex text in their daily school activities. The data for our sixth graders is limited in that this is their first year using this program. The data shows that while they are in the sixth grade students with disabilities they are functioning significantly below their peers within our school population. 8  We find that our ELL students enjoy working with these programs and have shown progress in their reading and writing skills based on these programs. Students move up on the lexile levels as the program sees individual student progress and moves them accordingly. Front Row and TenMarks for Math are computer based websites in which students can strengthen and develop their math skills by working on their functional levels of instruction. These programs are used to assess and develop targeted instruction for our students on the skills that they need assistance with based on their baseline assessments taken as part of these programs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We will not be discontinuing any of our programs this year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students are invited to participate in all school programs including our after-school programs. After School Programs - Computer Assisted Program - Students meet one time weekly for a total of two hours to develop their literacy skills which focus on guided reading, independent reading, the writing process and exploration of the wonderful world of words. The students also use on-line learning through Achieve 3000 and Get a Clue Programs to develop their reading, writing, speaking and listening skills. - Mathematics Program – students meet one time weekly for a total of two hours to further their ability in mathematics with a focus on the key performance indicators and their problem solving abilities. A special focus is on the development of the language of mathematics and understanding the key vocabulary needed to solve real world problems. - High School Test Preparation – students are provided the opportunity to attend a program that focuses on the Specialized High School Exam that eighth grade students take in the fall. This program runs for three weeks in the spring for seventh graders and is followed up by a three week refresher course for the grade 8 students in the fall prior to the exam. Both components (verbal and math) of the exam are addressed by one two hour session each week. Our Academic Intervention Services mentioned above are well rounded and content specific in nature. All students are invited to participate in these programs. Parents are sent letters detailing the program and the possible impact it will have on their child’s academic success, and attendance to these programs is monitored on a daily basis. Parents are kept informed regarding their child’s progress. The teachers working in these programs are involved in the development and implementation of the skills to be addressed. - We also have the following after school programs to address students' interest. They include: Drama, Debate, CHAMPS, Art, Creative Writing, Soccer, Basketball and Young Runners. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All classrooms are equipped with a smartboard that allows students to interact with their instructional programs in each of their content area classes. FREESTANDING ENGLISH AS A NEW LANGUAGE (ENL) Our ENL program for our self-contained special education students is a co-teaching and stand-alone program that addresses their individual educational needs. The students participate in five sessions of 45 minutes of co-teaching and five stand-alone ENL instruction during our six day cycle. For the remainder of their instructional time, they receive instruction using ENL methodology. During the course of their day, they are working with teachers who have received the necessary ENL training to work effectively with these children. During the ENL session, the ENL teacher specialist works with the students and their paraprofessionals utilizing the materials 9  listed below: -Spelling Connections – Grades K/1 – This book focuses on phonemic awareness from the sounds of the letters to the thinking, spelling, reading and writing of the English language. -Phonics Build Better Readers Activity Book – Grade K/1 – This book continues to develop the phonemic awareness of the students that strengthens their reading and comprehension abilities. The book series contains short stories that focus on the sounds that were introduced. -Handwriting by Zaner-Bloser – These books focuses on the writing of the letters in the English language. -Starfall.com Level I and II Reading and Writing Journal – This book assists the students in organizing their thoughts into the written word in a journal format. -Sight Word Journal by Lakeshore – This is a workbook series that focuses on developing the sight word vocabulary for new readers of the English language. We have added to our ENL program, the use of Brain Pop Computer program that provides a student centered program that focuses on themes throughout the year such as holiday exposure, different topics that may be used in their content area classes are explored through this program. Achieve 3000/Teen Biz is a computer assisted progam, that is being adopted for our students in our special education program that is used as a whole group activity in which students are introduced to a story and read it as a group. From this whole group activity, individual and or small group activities are developed to meet the needs of the students within each group. Technology is used to support language in the classroom. Web-based programs, such as: ESLgames.com is used to reinforce language ranging from basic identification labeling of objects to choosing the proper verb tense in a sentence. Achieve3000 utilized speaking, listening, reading and writing in the following manner: Teacher exposed the students to the necessary vocabulary for the article that will be read and listened to later in the lesson. The students respond verbally to a thought provoking opinion poll where they must provide a justification for their response. They can read and/or listen to the article on their lexile level. While the students are reading, they are given an opportunity to highlight important details or facts on the hard copy of the story. They respond to multiple-choice questions through a discussion held in the class based on the article. The students are asked to share their ideas related to the story. Based on individual student ability, lesson responses can be obtained in different form to meet the students ability to communicate in verbal and written form. BrainPop, Jr and BrainPop ESL are 2 web-based programs that expose the students to different various content areas and provide an entertaining and kid friendly way to learn new material. Discovery Education is an internet based resource that teachers use to provide visual learning for their students in the different content areas. The students can view and listen to different videos on topics discussed in class. The teachers can also print out the script and it can be read and discussed in class. Starfall.com is a web-based program that assists the students in building phonetic awareness and basic reading skills. Achieve3000 utilized speaking, listening, reading and writing in the following manner: Teacher exposed the students to the necessary vocabulary for the article that will be read later in the lesson. The students respond to a thought provoking opinion poll where they must provide a justification for their response. They can read and/or listen to the article on their lexile level. While the students are reading, they are given an opportunity to highlight important details or facts within the story. They respond to multiple-choice questions that are based on the article. The students are then asked to write a response to a thought provoking question. The student responses are then available to the teacher to see the level of understanding each student has regarding the article. Progress is tracked and differentiation can be provided within the ELA and ENL class. Words and Their Stories/Get a Clue - This is a internet based vocabulary program. Students receive an initial assessment to determine their baseline level of vocabulary knowledge. They are exposed to their appropriate grade level of vocabulary. This program utilizes different word recognition strategies including phonetics, prior knowledge, infer from context, complete analogies, complete sentence, word origins, synonyms, antoyms, understanding of multiple meanings, etc. 0  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We currently do not have bilingual programs in our school, we do have students who receive the instructional support of bilingual paraprofessionals in our special education programs. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We provide the required time of ENL sservice for each proficiency level. Students who are in a commanding level receive 3 sessions of Integrated Co-teaching in the ELA class. Students who are at an Expanding level on the NYSESLAT receive 5 sessions of 45 minutes period during a six day cycle of Integrated Co-Teaching ENL services in the ELA classroom. Students who are transitioning have 3 co-teaching periods in ELA or other subject areas and 3 Stand alone periods of ENL services in a six day cycle. Students who are emerging will receive 3 sessions of 45 minutes of stand alone ENL program and 5 sessions of integrated co-teaching ELA/ENL instruction. Students who are on a beginning level will receive 5 sessions of integrated co-teaching in the ELA class and 5 sessions of ENL Stand alone instruction during a 6 day cycle. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All classrooms are equipped with a smartboard that allows students to interact with their instructional programs in each of their content area classes. FREESTANDING ENGLISH AS A NEW LANGUAGE (ENL) Our ENL program for our self-contained special education students is a co-teaching and stand-alone program that addresses their individual educational needs. The students participate in five sessions of 45 minutes of co-teaching and five stand-alone ENL instruction during our six day cycle. For the remainder of their instructional time, they receive instruction using ENL methodology. During the course of their day, they are working with teachers who have received the necessary ENL training to work effectively with these children. During the ENL session, the ENL teacher specialist works with the students and their paraprofessionals utilizing the materials listed below: -Spelling Connections – Grades K/1 – This book focuses on phonemic awareness from the sounds of the letters to the thinking, spelling, reading and writing of the English language. -Phonics Build Better Readers Activity Book – Grade K/1 – This book continues to develop the phonemic awareness of the students that strengthens their reading and comprehension abilities. The book series contains short stories that focus on the sounds that were introduced. -Handwriting by Zaner-Bloser – These books focuses on the writing of the letters in the English language. -Starfall.com Level I and II Reading and Writing Journal – This book assists the students in organizing their thoughts into the written word in a journal format. -Sight Word Journal by Lakeshore – This is a workbook series that focuses on developing the sight word vocabulary for new readers of the English language. We have added to our ENL program, the use of Brain Pop Computer program that provides a student centered program that focuses on themes throughout the year such as holiday exposure, different topics that may be used in their content area classes are explored through this program. Achieve 3000/Teen Biz is a computer assisted progam, that is being adopted for our students in our special education program that is used as a whole group activity in which students are introduced to a story and read it as a group. From this whole group activity, individual and or small group activities are developed to meet the needs of the students within each group. Technology is used to support language in the classroom. Web-based programs, such as: ESLgames.com is used to reinforce language ranging from basic identification labeling of objects to choosing the proper verb tense in a sentence. Achieve3000 utilized speaking, listening, reading and writing in the following manner: Teacher exposed the students to the necessary vocabulary for the article that will be read and listened to later in the lesson. The students respond verbally to a thought provoking opinion poll where they must provide a justification for their response. They can read and/or listen to the article on their lexile level. While the students are reading, they are given an opportunity to highlight important details or facts on the hard copy of the story. They respond to multiple-choice questions through a discussion held in the class based on the 1  article. The students are asked to share their ideas related to the story. Based on individual student ability, lesson responses can be obtained in different form to meet the students ability to communicate in verbal and written form. BrainPop, Jr and BrainPop ESL are 2 web-based programs that expose the students to different various content areas and provide an entertaining and kid friendly way to learn new material. Discovery Education is an internet based resource that teachers use to provide visual learning for their students in the different content areas. The students can view and listen to different videos on topics discussed in class. The teachers can also print out the script and it can be read and discussed in class. Starfall.com is a web-based program that assists the students in building phonetic awareness and basic reading skills. Achieve3000 utilized speaking, listening, reading and writing in the following manner: Teacher exposed the students to the necessary vocabulary for the article that will be read later in the lesson. The students respond to a thought provoking opinion poll where they must provide a justification for their response. They can read and/or listen to the article on their lexile level. While the students are reading, they are given an opportunity to highlight important details or facts within the story. They respond to multiple-choice questions that are based on the article. The students are then asked to write a response to a thought provoking question. The student responses are then available to the teacher to see the level of understanding each student has regarding the article. Progress is tracked and differentiation can be provided within the ELA and ENL class. Words and Their Stories/Get a Clue - This is a internet based vocabulary program. Students receive an initial assessment to determine their baseline level of vocabulary knowledge. They are exposed to their appropriate grade level of vocabulary. This program utilizes different word recognition strategies including phonetics, prior knowledge, infer from context, complete analogies, complete sentence, word origins, synonyms, antoyms, understanding of multiple meanings, etc. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All students who are newcomers (0 to 3 years) are provided with as much support as needed in order to become familiar with our school via tours and a buddy system so that they have another student or adult to rely upon for class movement and how to get around the building. All students enter our building as new to our building. All students are given a tour of our school and they quickly learn where their classes are located and who their teachers are. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish is our second language program for all students in our school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We do not have this program in our school. 2  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We are a UFT Teacher Center school. Teachers are given flyers for different workshops that they can attend during school hours and after school. Teachers are encouraged to participate in on-going professional development to aide them in their instructional practices for all students groups within our school. Teachers surveyed twice a year to ascertain the professional development needs of all teachers. The director of the UFT Teachers Center will provide on-going professional development workshops in high interest areas and teachers will be given an opportunity to take part in these workshops during the PD time that occurs weekly as part of their UFT contract. Lead teachers are used to provide targeted professional devleopment for the teachers of the ELL students. Through the observations of our teachers, we can also suggest and provide the necessary professional development to aide the teachers in meeting the needs of students in our school. Our staff participates in two sessions weekly of collaborative teaching professional development activities designed and developed by our teaching staff. The teachers work to design professional activities that will strengthen and develop the language of our students in all content areas. They share student work samples and discuss how they can make changes to the assignment for maximum stuent participation. The following programs and topics are provided to all teachers in our effort to develop and strengthen programs for all students: - Rubric Evaluation – Teachers develop rubrics with their classes to evaluate student work. Rubrics are developed for writing assignments that are aligned to the state standards. - Differentiation in the Subject Area Classroom – Teachers develop and implement instructional strategies to meet the needs of all the students in their classes. Teacher training and workshops examining differentiation in the classroom are provided to all staff members throughout the school year. Teachers meet in collaborative teacher teams to focus on how differentiation can be incorporated into their classrooms throughout their daily lessons. We also examine the data available to see how we can group students for learning. We discuss with the general education teachers the modality report for the NYSESLAT exam and discuss ways in which we can provide meaningful instruction to develop the areas of language that are still considered to be deficient for our current ELLs. - Teachers have developed two collaborative groupings that they are working with throughout this school year. Teachers are sharing their best practices during these weekly meetings. The focus of these groups are Curriculum Based and Inquiry Student Needs Based. The Curriculum Based groups are teachers working with teachers who teach the same subject matter and grade level. They work together to develop classroom activities that are Common Core Aligned, instructional units and review of student work samples to determine if the activity yielded the results they wanted from their students. The Inquiry Student Needs Based group meet as teachers who teach the same students. This group focuses on the specific needs of their students and develops activities around the needs of the students that they are focusing on for this inquiry work. - Our Writing Initiative – For the last several years, we have focused on student writing, specifically in the area of writing mechanics (e.g., capitalization, spelling, punctuation and usage). In addition, we are also focusing on the specific needs for our student population, which is primarily former ELL, to develop their vocabulary skills, and to further their understanding of figurative language. We have developed a school wide Writing Mechanics Rubric to help us evaluate students' work samples. We are unified in our efforts to improve the written and spoken English language of our current and former ELLs. Students who are newly proficient in English are considered for Inquiry follow up in English Language Arts. This also provides additional support for these students through the mandated and enrichment groups and the after school programs. - Public Speaking Initiative – We have come to understand that our current and former ELL students who speak Chinese at home often do not volunteer to speak in class. We have begun to monitor student participation in class more systematically. 3  We focus our efforts on the effective communication skills of our current and former ELLs by monitoring their ability to develop their oral speaking skills through this initiative. All teachers are given the opportunity to participate in training that they feel will benefit themselves and their students. All teachers are working with ELLs have received the necessary training and are encouraged to attend any professional activity that will be of benefit to themselves and their students. Professional development activities for the assistant principals include conferences held on the city-wide andborough level that address our student population's unique needs. The conferences include ENL instructional content specific workshops, development of the LAP document, NYSESLAT administration and scoring training. Professional development activities for the school secretaries include webcasts, meetings to address the changes in the Home Language Survey, the ELL identification process, etc. Professional development for the Parent Coordinator includes meetings held by the Office of Student Enrollment and the Office of Parent Engagement to address the needs of the students and the parents of English Language Learners to assist them in their understanding of the programs and activities for their children within the NYC DOE. The professional development that is given to the staff for those who teach the ELL and the former ELL includes school based programs that the teachers design and the administration supports to address the concerns and needs of our staff. At the beginning of each school year, each academy has a meeting in which the students who have recently reached proficiency are discussed. This meeting includes the test accommodations for these students as well as conversations with the past and future teachers to assist the students in a smooth transition from one grade to the next. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our staff meets weekly within their academies to discuss students and any concerns that they may have about a student. Each academy director or assistant principal meets with a PPT/SIT monthly to address any students who may be in need of further assistance. The first meetings generally focus on newly arrived sixth grade students who may be having adjustment issues. - Each school must provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Professional development is given by ENL teachers and administration to meet this requirement and is scheduled to occur during our professional development time on Wednesdays. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. This requirement is met by sending our ENL teachers out to trainings offered by the BFSC and the UFT Teaching Center. Teachers are also welcomed to attend other Professional Development that they may find on there own that is of interest to them. - This newly determined focused professional development will be addressed in our first meeting with staff so that we can continue to provide high quality professional development for our teaching staff. 4  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During our weekly parent communication sessions, we will work to meet with parents to discuss our goals for their child, discuss their scores on the NYSESLAT assessment, and our efforts to provide our teaching staff with the tools they need to provide quality educational experiences for all students. These meetings occur at minimum of 4 times a year. Program goals are clarified and student progress towards individual goals are shared at that time. During these meetings, parents are told about their child's language needs within the content areas and how they are progressing towards their goals. Our community assistant as well as our bilingual staff will provide the translation needed for the parents to fully participate in these meetings. The records of these weekly individual meeting will be kept on file in the ENL Coordinator's office. All agendas, meeting minutes and handouts given to the parents will be kept on file for review upon request. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents are invited to attend all PTA meetings as well as to participate in meetings that will assist them in working more effectively with their children. Currently, we have offered such workshops on developing homework and study skills, and transitioning into the middle school to aid the parents in assisting their child in making a successful transition into our school. We communicate with parents by sending home monthly newsletters, flyers about upcoming meetings and events, weekly phone messages (in English and Chinese), and email notifications. All written communications are done in English and Chinese. These various modes of communication have been increasingly successful in getting the word out to our parents regarding upcoming events and special programs. In addition to the four quarterly report cards, students will also be given five progress reports throughout the school year to inform parents of how their child is doing in each of his/her classes. Parents will also be able to go on line to EdLine to check on their child's progress and homework assignments. The teachers will update their students' information on a weekly basis. Homework assignments will posted. We still recognize the need for a Community Assistant who is fluent in Chinese, so that we may better bridge the gap between the school community and our Chinese speaking families. The Community Assistant has been a tremendous asset to our school community. She translates all written communications and records the weekly phone message that goes home. She attends all school events and enables our Chinese speaking families to more fully participate in our school. For our Spanish, Russian, Arabic , French and Polish parents, we employ the use of our bilingual paraprofessionals to translate the necessary documents for our parents who require this service. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 5  6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Justin Berman, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Christa McAuliffe School DBN: 20K187 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Justin Berman Title Principal Lisa Forsyth Assistant Principal Carla Palumbo Parent Coordinator Lucy Lopez Vito LaBella ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent James Coccaro Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A N/A Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Melissa Domazetovski School Counselor Karina Constantinos Lucia Perez- Medina Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A JoAnn Gasser Other Speech Provider Paula Levental N/A Other ENL/Spanish Teacher Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 N/A N/A 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 N/A 8  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 20K187 School Name: Christa McAuliffe IS 187 Superintendent: Costantino The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Carla Palumbo Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use the Home Language listed in ATS so that we know what languages are used by our parents in the home. We also review the information located on the Blue Emergency contact card to update ATS information. Each September, we send home a survey to our parents asking them to select the language that they wish to be contacted in. This information is recorded in our File Maker database and ATS will be updated as well. Parents also can receive information on PupilPath in their home language. This is for any documents that we type into the system. This program does not translate documents that are attached to the system. 9  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Chinese Any Spanish Russian Arabic Bengali (Bangla in Bangladesh) Polish Albanian Mandarin Cantonese Vietnamese Portuguese Slovak Romanian Ukrainian Urdu Fulani Uzbek 746 604 29 9 9 25 6 2 0 0 0 1 1 1 3 1 1 1 51.88% 42% 2.02% 0.63% 0.7% 1.75% 0.42% 0.14% 0 0 0 0.07% 0.07% 0.07% 0.21% 0.07% 0.07% 0.07% 706 423 32 14 8 28 5 2 157 55 1 1 1 2 2 0 1 0 49.1% 29.42% 2.23% 0.97% 0.56% 1.95% 0.35% 0.14% 10.92% 3.82% 0.07% 0.07% 0.07% 0.14% 0.14% 0 0.07% 0 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. There are no languages that represent a 10% population in our school that is not listed above. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Welcome Letter September How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All documents are written in English and then translated into Chinese by our Pupil Accounting Secretary who 0  Procedures on Days with Citywide Emergency Conditions or Major Storm Days September NJHS Letter September speaks and writes Chinese. We have 3 Spanish, 1 Russian and 1 Polish speaking paraprofessionals who are able to translate important documents, speak to the parents and assist them in completing the necessary forms required by the school. We also have other staff members who speak Chinese, Arabic, French and Spanish who are available to translate documents. Documents will be sent to the translation unit for any languages that are not listed above. All documents are written in English and then translated into Chinese by our Pupil Accounting Secretary who speaks and writes Chinese. We have 3 Spanish, 1 Russian and 1 Polish speaking paraprofessionals who are able to translate important documents, speak to the parents and assist them in completing the necessary forms required by the school. We also have other staff members who speak Chinese, Arabic, French and Spanish who are available to translate documents. Documents will be sent to the translation unit for any languages that are not listed above. All documents are written in English and then translated into Chinese by our Pupil Accounting Secretary who speaks and writes Chinese. We have 3 Spanish, 1 Russian and 1 Polish speaking paraprofessionals who are able to translate important documents, speak to the parents and assist them in completing the necessary forms required by the school. We also have other staff members who speak Chinese, Arabic, French and Spanish who are available to translate documents. Documents will be sent to the translation unit for any languages that are not listed above. 1  School-wide Initiatives September Change of student's personal information and 3 blue Emergency Home Contact Cards September Internet Acceptable Use and Safety Policy (IAUSP) September All documents are written in English and then translated into Chinese by our Pupil Accounting Secretary who speaks and writes Chinese. We have 3 Spanish, 1 Russian and 1 Polish speaking paraprofessionals who are able to translate important documents, speak to the parents and assist them in completing the necessary forms required by the school. We also have other staff members who speak Chinese, Arabic, French and Spanish who are available to translate documents. Documents will be sent to the translation unit for any languages that are not listed above. All documents are written in English and then translated into Chinese by our Pupil Accounting Secretary who speaks and writes Chinese. We have 3 Spanish, 1 Russian and 1 Polish speaking paraprofessionals who are able to translate important documents, speak to the parents and assist them in completing the necessary forms required by the school. We also have other staff members who speak Chinese, Arabic, French and Spanish who are available to translate documents. Documents will be sent to the translation unit for any languages that are not listed above. All documents are written in English and then translated into Chinese by our Pupil Accounting Secretary who speaks and writes Chinese. We have 3 Spanish, 1 Russian and 1 Polish speaking paraprofessionals who are able to translate important documents, speak to the parents and assist them in completing the necessary forms required by the school. We also have other staff members who speak Chinese, Arabic, French and Spanish who are available to translate documents. 2  504 Services September PupilPath Activation code September Lunch form letter September Documents will be sent to the translation unit for any languages that are not listed above. All documents are written in English and then translated into Chinese by our Pupil Accounting Secretary who speaks and writes Chinese. We have 3 Spanish, 1 Russian and 1 Polish speaking paraprofessionals who are able to translate important documents, speak to the parents and assist them in completing the necessary forms required by the school. We also have other staff members who speak Chinese, Arabic, French and Spanish who are available to translate documents. Documents will be sent to the translation unit for any languages that are not listed above. All documents are written in English and then translated into Chinese by our Pupil Accounting Secretary who speaks and writes Chinese. We have 3 Spanish, 1 Russian and 1 Polish speaking paraprofessionals who are also able to translate important documents, speak to the parents and assist them in completing the necessary forms required by the school. We also have other staff members who speak Chinese, Arabic, French and Spanish who are available to translate documents. Documents will be sent to the translation unit for any languages that are not listed above. All documents are written in English and then translated into Chinese by our Pupil Accounting Secretary who speaks and writes Chinese. We have 3 Spanish, 1 Russian and 1 Polish speaking paraprofessionals who are able to translate important documents, speak to the parents and assist them in completing the necessary forms required by the school. We also have other staff members who speak Chinese, Arabic, French and Spanish 3  Parent Teacher Conference Notification and Announcement September, November, March, May NYS Math and ELA Test Dates and Regulation on Electronics April and May who are available to translate documents. Documents will be sent to the translation unit for any languages that are not listed above. All documents are written in English and then translated into Chinese by our Pupil Accounting Secretary who speaks and writes Chinese. We have 3 Spanish, 1 Russian and 1 Polish speaking paraprofessionals who are able to translate important documents, speak to the parents and assist them in completing the necessary forms required by the school. We also have other staff members who speak Chinese, Arabic, French and Spanish who are available to translate documents. Documents will be sent to the translation unit for any languages that are not listed above. All documents are written in English and then translated into Chinese by our Pupil Accounting Secretary who speaks and writes Chinese. We have 3 Spanish, 1 Russian and 1 Polish speaking paraprofessionals who are able to translate important documents, speak to the parents and assist them in completing the necessary forms required by the school. We also have other staff members who speak Chinese, Arabic, French and Spanish who are available to translate documents. Documents will be sent to the translation unit for any languages that are not listed above. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 4  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? These meetings are for incoming 6th grade students who have IEP's. These meetings are held in an effort to eliminate anxiety for the students and parents in their transition from elementary school to middle school. The IEP is reviewed and any questions are answered about the program that their child will be attending. We discuss class programs, ENL mandates, mainstreaming, related services, health concerns, test modifications, transportation and promotional criteria for the upcoming school year. We do a mini-tour of the school to address specific student and parent needs. These meetings are completed with the assistance of our Community Assistant and other staff members who speak the family's home language. If we do not have a staff member to meet the family's needs we will call the translation unit and ask if they could send someone or have someone available via phone. With the aide of our in-school staff and community assistant, translation services are provided for families and parents. If there is a family who requires translation that we do not have a translator for, the translation unit will be contacted. With the aide of our in-school staff and community assistant we provide translation services for families and parents. During the one to one parent teacher conferences, parents are invited to bring along their own translator over the age of 18. If there is a family who requires translation that we do not have a translator for, the translation unit will be contacted. Through the use of our in-school staff we provide translation services to aide the parent in their understanding of the various components of the IEP and the process. We will at times ask the assistance of the translation unit to Initial welcome meeting July and August Parent-Teacher Conference - Curriculum Night September 20, 2018 May 16, 2019 Parent-Teacher Conferences November 27 - 28, 2018 March 26-27, 2019 IEP Meetings Throughout the school year 5  Thursday Parent Engagement Throughout the school year bridge that gap for us while the meeting is taking place. School staff will assist in translation during these meetings. When needed the translation unit will be contacted to assist us in communicating with families. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, PupilPath allows for translation of any item posted to the website used to inform families so that they are aware of the situation. When appropriate, in-house staff will translate any written documents that may be sent home and call families as needed. A list of families who require translation in a language that we do not have on staff will be kept so that we could inform them through use of the translation unit. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Chancellor's Regulation A-663 will be reviewed with all staff members during initial professional development meetings in September. At that time the contact information for the translation unit will be shared with staff. As well as names of staff in-house that can assist with translation. Updates and/or changes to the Regulation would be shared during Professional Development session on Wednesday afternoons. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At the beginning of the school year, we will distribute the Parents' Bill of Rights and the Parents' Guide to Language Access. We have posted the Welcome Poster at the security desk as well as in the main office. The Language ID Guide is also posted in the main office and security desk for use with visitors to our school. The school safety plan will contain the necessary procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the main office for assistance. These documents are also posted in Chinese for the parents of our students. 6  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? During the school year, we will survey the parents via the PupilPath system to ascertain the quality of our communication systems via the preferred language of our parents.0 7 
