 19K190 School Name: P.S. 190 SHEFFIELD Principal: STEPHAUN HILL   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 190K-The Sheffield School 19K190 331900010190 PK -5 School Number (DBN): 590 Sheffield Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11207 718-346-8780 Phone Number: 718-345-8765 Fax: Stephaun Hill Shill3@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Stephaun Hill Sharon Samuels n/a Stephaun Hill n/;a n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 19 Dr. Thomas McBryde, Jr. Superintendent: 557 Pennsylvania Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11207 Superintendent’s Office Address: TMCBRYDEJR@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-240-2741 Phone Number: 718-240-2747 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) North Brooklyn Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3592 Phone Number: 718-935-2382 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Stephaun Hill Sharon Samuels Christina Ricketts TinishaJones n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Jessica Chong Monique Miller *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/ UFT Member/UFT   Name Simone Phillips Webster Rose Lecodet Kenya Vazquez Violet Olikiabo Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The leadership of PS 190 challenges students, teachers, parents/guardians, and community to focus on academic excellence. The staff fosters respect for each student beginning with our morning affirmation: "I promise to respect myself, I promise to respect others, I promise to learn, and I promise to have a good day". We believe in children first. We instill a love for learning in our students and encourage them to become lifelong learners prepared for the 21st century. We create learning opportunities that provide clear expectations and academic rigor. Our school is organized for effort with clearly defined academic and behavioral standards. The performing arts programs such as music, art and dance are the essential driving force that motivates our children to learn. Through our parental involvement   program and close relationship between home and school we ensure that all students reach their goals. PS 190 is a school community that is teaming for success. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. It is our belief that students, including students with disabilities (SWDs) and English language learners (ELLs), learn best when they are actively engaged with targeted instruction. The scaffolding of skills allows for different entry points to address needs of students in heterogeneously grouped classes. In addition, the utilization of rigorous questioning techniques are essential in the development of critical thinking and communication skills. The school community recognizes that students differ in learning styles, readiness and interests and to address this diversity learners are engaged through tasks that support the different modalities of learning. School staff created a nurturing learning environment that recognizes, assesses and identifies student learning needs. Providing a coherent curriculum that supports student achievement through ongoing assessments is an essential component of our school program. ● Coherent curriculum developed across grades and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards ● Active engagement of students with task differentiated by content, process and/or product ● Differentiated instructional features i.e. content, process and/or product ● Formative assessment to include conferencing and conference logs, rubrics, feedback on displayed student work, etc. Teacher Center coach and administrative team support teacher practice and professional development by: ● Differentiated professional development program ● Walk-through, informal and formal observations, meetings, workshops, and one-on-one discussions. ● School workshops and study groups Teachers utilize a model of instruction where each lesson begins with teacher modeling. Teachers collect and analyze student data from classroom assessments to establish learning. Teachers encourage students to take ownership of their own learning by developing next steps with students and by providing descriptive actionable feedback. The school has a strong culture of mutual trust and respect that assures students’ social, emotional and academic needs are supported We have a strong school culture grounded in respect and mutual trust and is explicitly celebrated in the artistic expression found throughout the school’s hallways. College insignias are conspicuously placed throughout the corridors of the school at students’ eye level enduring a continued focus on academic success. The high expectations for students and staff consistently convey respect for achievement assuring that students are motivated to reach higher levels of achievement 0  Small class size ensures that students are well known by the adults in the school. In addition, a part time guidance counselor is available to proactively intervene when teachers raise concerns. Students report that they are better able to manage peer conflicts knowing that “someone is always there” to help them The school communicates student learning progress with families via progress reports and parent-teacher conferences. Throughout grade levels. P.S. 190 provides a well-rounded rigorous arts curriculum to all students. This includes the four areas of the arts: dance, drama, and music. All arts courses are aligned with both the New York State Arts Standards and the New York City Blueprint for the Arts. Features of our Arts Education Program include: ● Teachers implement the strands of the blueprint by making connections to academic subjects. ● Through collaborative team meetings, arts specialists share strategies and unit themes to provide a connected experience for our students. ● Curriculum enrichment is provided through the integration of arts residencies that support both arts learning and provide opportunities for students to delve deeper into the academic subject. ● During the past eight years, we have developed collaborations with several art organizations, which have helped standards based aligned instruction. o Violin, Steele Pan, Chorus, Cultural Night Out, and Cotillion in June. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Based on PS 190's NY State 2015-2017 ELA test results for Grades 3-8 SWDs there is a need for additional academic support in ELA. Because of the test results for SWDs and ELLs for the 2015-2017 school year, PS 190 is utilizing Strategies for Writers by Zaner-Bloser to help prepare them for success in middle and high school. This writing program is designed to assist our students with overall proficiency in writing. Additional ESL Services are provided to support ELL students by ESL Teacher. Year Number Tested Level 1 Level 2 19 12 5 1 1 3 2015 20 2016 13 2017 8 Year ELL Number Tested 2015 3 2016 1 1  1 2017 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In addition, we are prioritizing our instructional goals to develop Response to Intervention (RTI) team, policy, and procedure that outlines a protocol for identifying and supporting students ensuring that interventions are matched strategically to student needs. We will continue to utilize individualized professional development plans by implementing Charlotte Danielson’s framework for teaching. This researched-based teaching framework will provide clear expectations for teacher practice and serve as the focus for teacher development. To continue to deepen and broaden work around the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) by engaging closely with and examining school-wide implementation of the Citywide Instructional Expectations (CIE). Specifically, in literacy, social studies, and science, all students will engage in more challenging assignments that will accelerate their learning, deepen their conceptual understanding, and strengthen their ability to use textual evidence in writing and discussion. All students will engage in mathematical study which requires fluency, application, and conceptual understanding. By June 2019, curriculum activities will be Common Core aligned, rigorous, cognitively engaging and support all learners with being successful, as evidenced by student tasks, assessment data, and work products. RELATED INITIATIVES: ● PD plan which includes staff professional development based on Charlotte Danielson ● Monday Professional Development for all staff ● Data Talk Meetings with Data Coach during teacher team meetings ● Creation of a Teacher Effectiveness Team assigned to work with teachers on improving their instructional practices and effectiveness. ● School-wide benchmark and base-line assessments in addition to teacher-made assessments ● Teacher teams meet on a weekly basis to discuss school-wide instructional focus, conduct gap analyses through examination of student work to surface gaps and trends in student learning. Intended Outcomes School-wide Goals: ● Improvement of teaching practices through the use of the Danielson Framework ● Improvement of student learning and the increase of student engagement in all classrooms through the use of higher-order thinking questions and enhancement of the quality of questions and student activities ● Improvement and evidence of cohesion across all classrooms; teachers will implement similar research-based strategies and instructional practices to engage all learners ● Improvement of assessment practices and the manner in which assessment data are used across the school 2  ● Teachers improve and enhance their knowledge of disaggregating data and using the data to drive instruction and plan accordingly while assessing and recognizing opportunities for re-teaching and making lesson plan modifications that address the needs of the students ● Ensure all lessons in all classrooms incorporate common core standards, Citywide Instructional Expectations, and common core shifts, and support multiple entry points to engage all students while promoting student progress To develop rigorous coherent curriculum that begins to infuse the Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Research identifies a guaranteed and viable curriculum, along with teacher quality, as the most important factors affecting student achievement. Since curriculum development is an ongoing process of evaluation, continuous effort to incorporate new technologies, research and methodologies we will update our curriculum with the evolving state standards in the following ways: ● The school will engage staff in analyzing the CCSS in English language arts and Math with a focus on implications for upgrading curriculum. ● Collaborative teacher teams will engage in lesson planning processes to ensure alignment with/between standards, instruction and assessment and a 180 day calendar. ● Professional development opportunities will support teachers in examining curriculum through a lens of evolving state standards ● Professional development will focus on coherence between curriculum, instruction and assessment and will be aligned to Common Core State Standards and the preparation of all students for college and career readiness 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 19K190 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 185 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 11 11 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 12 10 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 95.1% % Reduced Lunch 3.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 21.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.33 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 37.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 86% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 3 3 86.7% 1.1% 15.1% 77.3% 0.0% 0.0% 2 19% 7 30.7% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS 190K MOSL data September 2018. Need: To improve reading comprehension skills in select students in Grades K-5. Analysis of data from our running records for our general education students and special education students indicates that 49% of students are reading at or below grade level. These results show a need for a targeted focus on rigorous instruction in English Language Arts. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS 190 teachers will continue to implement a curriculum focused on Balanced Literacy and reading cultural relevant text to create equity in order to increase student progress by 10%, as measured by students moving two reading levels on the F & P Benchmark Assessment. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher programs will include 50 minutes per week of common planning time, a school wide structure based on The Highly Engaged Classroom. Grades K-5 Teachers Weekly Principal Sept. 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal Coach and Teachers UFT Teacher Center coach will work directly with Grades K-5 teachers to ensure that reading comprehension instruction for all students, including Students with Disabilities and ELL’s is in alignment with CCLS and informed by data. Grades K-5 Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Coach Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Parental Involvement Programs will include Curriculum Night and Cultural Relevant Text training to promote literacy development at home. Parents of Grades K-5 Students Oct. 2018-June 2019 Teacher and student trust is continually developed through conferences and feedback to students about their progress in reading comprehension. Grades K-5 Teachers Jan. 2019-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal, Coach, and Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parental Involvement Programs will include Curriculum Night and Cultural Relevant Text training to promote literacy development at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Master Programming Schedule to allow (1) period per week of common planning time for Grades K-5 teachers Funding for teacher coach Funding for Cultural Relevant Text Reading program   6   Book-The Highly Engaged Classroom Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Running Records will be administered in February 2019 and results analyzed to assess progress toward our goal. Ongoing. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Fountas & Pinnel Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on PS 190K’s incident location summary 2017-2018, we noticed a majority of incidents that took place were located in our school classrooms. These results show a need for a target focus of a warm and safe environment inside PS 190K’s clasrooms. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of teachers will implement Read Alouds connected to the Bucket Filling philosophy and 7 Social Emotional Strengths in order to ensure students learn in a safe and inclusive culture that is conducive to learning, in order to increase respectful behavior among students by 10% of teachers moving to effective and highly effective on Domain 2, Component A. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Our research based program, Building Proficiency Through Personalized Reading: MyON Reader, the publisher of the largest school library access to digital books. Grades K-5 Teachers Weekly Principal Jan. 2019-June 2019 Assistant Principal Students can easily locate books that they can read on their level at their own pace. This will allow students with disabilities and ELL’s to keep track of their progress. Grades K-5 Teachers Jan. 2019-June 2019 Parents become partners in improving reading proficiency by encouraging their children to use Cultural Relevant Text at home. Parents of Grades K-5 Teachers Jan. 2019-June 2019 Coaches and Teachers Principal Assistant Principal Coaches Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator All stakeholders can easily view progress charts which helps foster trust. Grades K-5 Teachers Jan. 2019-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Coaches and Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents become partners in improving reading proficiency by encouraging their children to use Cultural Relevant Text at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 9  Funding for teachers   Cultural Relevant Text Program  Laptops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. March 2019 Review of the Incident Location Summary Report. Ongoing. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PS 190 2018/19 Incident Summary Report. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on our June 2017-2018 F & P scores we have 52% of our students in grade K-5 at or above grade level in ELA. Therefore, we are providing Professional Development to support Grades K-5 teachers with Cultural Relevant Text Program training to increase reading comprehension. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of teachers will work in vertical teams during common planning time to develop learning progressions that show how students demonstrate a deeper understanding of literacy as they move through the grades (or from one grade to the next) evident by our agendas. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Our researched based program is the Building Proficiency Through Personalized Reading: MyON Reader. A program that uses personalized reading which puts the student at the center of the learning process. This program is great for improving reading proficiency, utilizing the tech-rich environment that students live and learn in today. This program takes into account students’ level of ability and accommodates students’ individual learning styles and strengths. This personalized reading program can cater to visual, auditory, and kinesthetic learners, including our school’s population of ELL’s, and students with disabilities. Parents of Select Grades K-5 Students Parents can become partners in improving reading proficiency, encouraging their children to use Cultural Relevant Text reading at home and sharing in their pride of accomplishment by viewing the progress charts. Parents of Select Grades K-5 Students Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Grades K-5 Teachers Weekly Principal Jan. 2019-June 2019 Assistant Principal Jan. 2019-June 2019 Coaches and Teachers Principal Assistant Principal Coach Principal Jan. 2019-June 2019 Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Teacher and student trust is continually developed through conferences and feedback to students about their progress in reading comprehension. Grades K-5 Teachers Jan. 2019-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Coaches and Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents can become partners in improving reading proficiency, encouraging their children to use Cultural Relevant Text reading at home and sharing in their pride of accomplishment by viewing the progress charts. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2  ● Funding for Teachers ● Funding for Cultural Relevant Text Professional Development ● Laptops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. March 2019, Cultural Relevant Text. Ongoing. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign-in Sheets for Professional Development based on Cultural Relevant Text. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on 2018 Analysis of MOTP data from Advance, teachers scored for Domain 3:3D, Using Assessment in Instruction, an average of 2.8 on a 4.0 scale. Therefore, we are differentiating our professional learning to support teachers in improving their assessment techniques with students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Administration will ensure high quality reading comprehension instruction in grades K-5 by an increase of 10% of teachers scoring Effective in Domain 3d. (Using Assessment in Instruction) as measured by the Charlotte Danielson Rubric. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will engage in Professional Development based on Charlotte Danielson 3d at least 2 times a year. Grades K-5 Teachers Weekly Principal Sept. 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal Teachers will plan lessons with colleagues that include questions and assessments that are regularly used to diagnose evidence of learning (including Students With Disabilities & ELLs students. Grades K-5 Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Workshops will be provided to parents. Grades K-5 Teachers Jan. 2019-June 2019 Coaches and Teachers Principal Assistant Principal Coach Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Administration will build trust with teachers through Professional Development planning time and usage of the Charlotte Danielson Rubric. Parents of Grades K-5 Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Coaches and Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Workshops will be provided to parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 5   Master Programming Schedule to allow (1) period per week of common planning time for Grades K-5 teachers  Funding for teacher coach  Funding for WONDERS Reading program  Book-Charlotte Danielson Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. March 2019, 2% of teachers will have made gains on their midyear MOYP in domain 3:3d for Grades K-5 teachers. Ongoing. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Charlotte Danielson Rubric. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Review of attendance records indicate low parent attendance at workshops Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS 190K will increase parent involvement by 10% by conducting 4 workshops (celebrations) to provide families with support based on our curriculum as measured by agendas and attendance sheets. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Beyond the Bake Sale: An Essential Guide to Families-School Partnership, by Ann Henderson and Karen Mapp, a nationally known book. Family members will be offered 3 study groups to attend. Grades K-5 Teachers Jan. 2019- Principal June 2019 Assistant Principal Coaches and Teachers Parent Coordinator Programs for Grades K-5 select students, including Students with Disabilities and ELL’s . Grades K-5 Teachers Sept. 2018- Principal Ensure parents will be offered to participate at book talks to understand and appreciate literacy. Parents of Grades K-5 Teachers Trust will be developed by inviting parents to attend activities during the school day (I.e. Donuts with Dads, Muffins with Moms, etc.) which includes parents viewing our Literacy Block to build trust for all stakeholders. Grades K-5 Teachers June 2019 Assistant Principal Coaches Jan. 2018- Principal June 2019 Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Oct. 2018- Principal June 2019 Assistant Principal Coaches and Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Ensure parents will be offered to participate at book talks to understand and appreciate literacy. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 8  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Parent calendar informing parents of events  Refreshments for events Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. March MyON Reports to view parent usage of the MyON Program for select parents of K-5 students. Ongoing. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. MyON Program. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students below grade level Students below grade level Students below grade level Students below grade level Students below grade level Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Reinforcement of common core curriculum standards Reinforcement of common core curriculum standards Reinforcement of common core curriculum standards Reinforcement of common core curriculum standards Mediations, Small Group, individual counseling, preventative services Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, large group During school Small group, large group During school Small group, large group During school Small group, large group During school Small group, large group During school 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. School uniforms, undergarments, belts, socks, and coats. 7 Students. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Administrative staff regularly attends hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly qualified ELA teachers. ● The pupil personnel secretary will work closely the network HR point to ensure that non-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. ● Mentors support struggling and un-qualified teachers 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Teachers will analyze baseline data to identify the gaps between current standards and the targeted CLLS in one unit of ELA and one unit in Math ● Teachers meet bi-weekly in department teams to assess student work and plan lessons the unit of study to meet the CCLS standard ● Teachers will develop a Common Core-aligned unit of study that incorporates opportunities for students to engage in CLLS related tasks Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). ● Parent Workshops ● Parent classroom visits ● Lunch Room Interaction with lower grades, K-2 ● Common Prep with lower grades, K-2 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Sharing of Data with regards to strengths and areas of concern obtained from formative and periodic assessments.  Data Specialist prepares reports and conducts professional development on the how to use the data to inform instruction  Teacher Teams meet to assess student work and plan lessons for the unit of study to meet the CCLS standard 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Funding Amount Indicate the amount Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and 4  Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 153,056.00 142,063.00 0 0 1,064,048.00 X X purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) pp. 9-11, 16-19 pp. 9-11, 16-19, 22 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 5  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 190K, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the PS 190K Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS 190K will support parents and families of Title I students by: 7  ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, PS 190K will: Parental Involvement and School Quality ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 8  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; PS 190K will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 190K , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 9  I. School Responsibilities: s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 0  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; 1  ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 19 School Name PS190 Borough Brooklyn School Number 190 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Stephaun Hill Coach Adrian Moore ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Rosalind Segura Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Chong, IEP/SETTS Related-Service Provider Ms. Mock, Speech Superintendent Thomas McBryde, Jr. Assistant Principal Nigel Harriott Coach Ms. Mack School Counselor Julie Solarsh Parent Parent Coordinator Mr. Santiago Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 186 3 Total number of ELLs 1 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.54%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Lang. n/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Students are assesssed in the beginning, middle and end of the year utilizing Running Records from Teacher's College. Additionally, Pre and Post assessments for reading and writing are ongoing. We adapted ReadyGen as our literacy curiculum we also use other suplimental materials for instruction such as Wilson's reading phonics based intervention program, Fundations and the reading comprehension focused Imagine It curriculum. There is now 1 ESL student at this time in the fourth grade whose native language is Arabic. The Ell’s the ESL teacher services typically enroll at a lower level such as a Beginner, and advance as they are serviced. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? n/a 4  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our ESL program is based on the results of all state tests such as NYSESLAT, ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies. We believe we are meeting our AMAO critieria because the majority of our students have made progress on the NYSESLAT. In addition we are meeting AYP. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? n/a 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The results of the ELL interim assessments are shared with teachers during grade and extended day professional development conferences. Articulation between the ESL and classroom teacher is ongoing. This ensures that students are actively engaged in standards-based instruction. The implication for our school’s Response to Intervention begins with articulation between the ESL teacher and the classroom teacher. Once strengths & weakness are identified, a systematic research based program for improving language acquisition program is utilized such as Wilson's Fundations. Teacher’s plan tasks that encourage & support thinking, reading, speaking, writing and listening. The following services are provided for SIFE students - Academic Intervention Services (AIS), After School Programs and One on One ESL instruction. ELL’s with less than three years in U.S. schools are supported by the ESL push in program, small group classroom differentiated instruction in language arts and academic instructional services support. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT exam report levels changed from the 2013-2014 school year to the most current NYSESLAT scores of the 2014-2015 school year from a 4 level progression to a 6 tiered path. The student was a beginner in the 2014 NYSESLAT. The student tested at an Entering level in the 2015 NYSESLAT. The breakdown of the NYSESLAT reflects improvements in reading and speaking. However, the results reflect the writing and listening modality have not inreased. The student tested Y in the LAB-r in 2014 when she enrolled midyear. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? n/a Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our school uses both a pull-out and a push-in co-teaching organizational teaching model. In this model the ESL teacher pushes in with students of similar grades and levels to assist the teacher with making input comprehensible for the ESL students utilizing research based strategies such as Sheltered Teaching Methods, differentiation, scaffolding, adding background information, modeling and providing examples, using a dictionary and translator when necessary. When pulling out, the ESL teacher groups students according to the new NYSESLAT levels, Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, Commanding. b. TBE program. If applicable. 5  Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students serviced in a push-in or pull-out capacity by the ESL teacher in our Freestanding ESL program based on their level. Entering and Emerging student levels receive 2 units of study or 360 minutes of instructional minutes by an ESL teacher weekly and, Transitioning and Expanding level students receive 1 unit of study or 180 minutes of instructional time by the ESL teacher weekly. Former ESL students receive .5 units of study or 90 instructional minutes. Students are grouped together according to their level and the ESL teacher pushes into one classroom with the group. Teachers cooperate so that their students are serviced appropriately. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers attend Professional development to learn about teaching strategies that will help them teach content areas to the ESL students. To make content comprehensible to ESL students, teachers use charts to empahize skills being taught, and illustrations to help simplify lessons. Each lesson is presented in a Multi-method Approach to reach all learners regardless of their preference including Visual, Kinesthetic and Audio. Sheltered Teaching including using the home language to aid understanding, using gestures and signaling, the use of Total Physical Therapy to help solidify learning. Teaching is scaffold and differentiated to help the students succeed at every task. Non-conventional methods are also employed to diversify learning to stimulate, motivate and create a non threatening environment where learning can thrive as they are engaged in fun activities such as the use of videos, Music, Games, Technology, Computers, and a smartboard or overhead projector. This fosters learning and second language acquisition can occur more naturally. Cultural relevance is added wherever possible to help bridge the gap between the American culture and their heritage by showing how the values are similar, etc. We believe it is important to offer lessons using content that reflects students' lives, interests and culture. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? When students are first identified as an ESL student because they fail the NYSITELL, then the Spanish LAB is administered if the student's home language is Spanish. No other native language evaluation is done as our school only offers a monolingual ESL program known as Freestanding English as a Second Language (ESL) 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Our school has students who have literacy and academic gaps due to the interruption of their formal education to return back to their country for a time. When they return they have to relearn much of what they were previously taught in the past. These learners require instruction in the basic concepts and skills necessary for academic success, including how to study and take notes, and how to participate in class discussions. These students are usually far behind their peers and easily frustrated to find this learning gap. Therefore a supportive environment is created that involves utilizing bilingual staff that speaks the same language and activity pairing with students who also speak the same language. These needs are recognized and specifically targeted by the ESL and classroom teachers. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 6  Specially designed academic instruction in English (SDAIE) and CALLA is our teaching approach for teaching academic content, social studies, science, math and ELA to our English language learners. Besides using the sheltered strategies which were mentioned before, teachers collaborate to continually reinforce new concepts and language in academic instruction and integrate concepts across content areas and language/literacy classes. The ESL teacher is a focal point for this and assists to provide simplification of language and explicit instruction and translation. Every opportunity is sought where material can be shared across the contents and used to teach phonics, reading, vocabulary, grammar and comprehension. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ESL students with IEP's are served according to their IEP mandates and goals. There are currently five ESL students with an IEP. The IEP/SETTS and ESL teacher both work together with the classroom teacher to avoid scheduling conflicts, share learning goals and limitations to maximize their instruction and secure these student's academic success. The ESL teacher is provided a copy of the student's IEP and attends meetings involving changes to the IEP so the ESL teacher can be aware of how best to help this student. All service providers are involved in this process including the ESL, IEP/SETTS, and Speech teachers so they can all be involved in streamlining ideas and lessons and helping the student learn more effectively and reach their IEP goals. Students with IEP's are placed within the least restrictive environment and additionally, when the ESL teacher pushes in, she takes these students into a general education class and this way these students are given the opportunity to be educated with non-disabled peers. They have access to the general education curriculum and provided with supplementary aids such as a Para (Educational Assistant) and or the ESL teacher. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Academic Intervention Services (AIS), After School Programs and One on One ESL instruction. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Providing additional time with an ESL teacher or establishing a self contained ESL class in a co-teaching model with a teachers who speak the language of our studnets, one Spanish and one Arabic speaking teacher. If we enroll enough students across two consecutive grades this is one consideration which our ELL students may benefit from. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We will continue to offer our Freestanding ESL program unless we enroll at least 15 students of Spanish speaking and/or 15 students who are Arabic native speakers in two to three consecutive grades. In this case we will eliminate our push-in ESL program and offere a self contained ESL classroom with an ESL teacher and a para who speak the students' native language. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Ells are afforded equal access to all school programs and are given preference often being mandated and assigned Academic Intervention Services (AIS), After School Programs and One on One ESL instruction. As state testing time approaches, our After School program begins and letters are sent home making the ESL students participation mandatory. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The following instructional materials are used to support ELL instruction: Real World Phonics, Words Their Way vocabulary, Reading Comprehension, video, audio and computer instruction administered by the ESL Teacher. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Instruction is delivered in English in our Freestanding ESL program, however, translation and interpretation services are used if necessary for communicating all official letters from the school. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 7  Appropriate age and level material is used as determined by Common Core Learning Standards and Core Knowledge Sequence is also consulted to supplement material. Teaching is targeted to bring students from where they are to make progress and catch up to where they are supposed to be. Assessments help guide instruction to determine what skills have been mastered and what needs to be retaught during small group instruction and homework assignments. Continued transitional support for the students reaching proficiency on the NYSELAT is supported by subject area teachers and student mainstreaming. The content area instructional component shall provide grade and age level appropriate instruction in the required content area subjects in English supported by English as a second language methodologies, employed in a systematic and structured way and shall be designed to develop cognitive skills of limited English proficient students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The following instructional materials are used to support ELL instruction: Real World Phonics, Words Their Way vocabulary, Reading Comprehension, video, audio and computer instruction administered by the ESL Teacher. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In the beginning of the year the school holds an ELL Parent Orientation where both the students and parents are invited to attend and information is shared to assist the student enrollment and transition into this new school system. The Parent Coordinator is involved and Parents along with the Ells are invited to ongoing activities such as Take your kids to school day, Book clubs, Movie Night etc. In addition the servive providers and teachers who will be working with these children throughout the school year work together to assist the students with making a smooth transition. They are available for any questions and for targeted educational assistance. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer a foreign language program at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development is provided to all staff by experienced pedagogues during grade and extended day professional development weekly meetings. New teachers receive mandatory ESL training from the regional support staff and additional training throughout the school year. The ESL teaher attends monthly training network meetings and additional Professional Developent offered externally 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 8  We have a list of helps such as glassaries from the Board of Education website, picture dictionaries and bilingual dictionaries, computers for using interactive websites for learning English. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 is dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. The English as a new language teacher receives a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours for language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? R Part 154 of the New York state Commissioner of Educations Regulations requires school districts to provide parents of new English language learners (ELL’s) an orientation session on state standards, assessments, school expectations and program requirements for bilingual education and English as a second language (ESL) programs. The orientation shall be provided in English or when necessary in the parents’ home language. Parents of ESL students attend an orientation at the beginning of the year. This orientation is held immediately after enrollment for late registrants. During orientation, they are apprised of available program options for their child including pull-out services. They then work with the LPT team to determine the ideal program requirements for their child. Parents are then updated on their child’s progress throughout the year during parent-teacher conferences. Based on parent feedback from previous years, the ESL teacher has also expanded the ESL program to include periodic assessment reports to keep parents consistently informed of student progress. At the end of the academic year, parents meet with both the ESL and classroom teachers to discuss the program’s success. The the LPT team uses both student academic data and parental feedback to revise the ESL program annually. In addition, parents of ELL’s have access to the parent coordinator who organizes functions year-round for the benefit of all students, including ELL’s. Our school also supports community affairs that benefit ELL’s such as free ESL classes, tutoring, volunteer support groups and free translation services. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are invited to such activities such as educational trips, tournaments, recitals, PTA meetings, fundraisers for charities that benefit children, Family Day Feast, school fairs, book clubs, and workshops held by the Board of Education or at other schools such as Parents Support about Let’s Talk, and Basic English For Spanish Speakers. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Stephaun Hill, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 3  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 4 
