 20K201 School Name: J.H.S. 201 THE DYKER HEIGHTS Principal: ROBERT CIULLA   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Dyker Heights Intermediate School 201 332000010201 6 – 8 School Number (DBN): 20K201 8010 12 th Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11228 718-833-9363 ext. 0 718 836-1786 Phone Number: Fax: Robert Ciulla rciulla@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Robert Ciulla Theresa Buono Daniela Camilleri Email Address: Parents’ Association President: Heather M. Tardugno SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Daniela Camilleri Craig Gabrian District Information Geographical District: 20 Superintendent’s Office Address: Karina Costantino Superintendent: 415 – 89 th Street, Brooklyn, New York 11209 KCostan@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-759-4912 Phone Number: 718-759-4842 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn South Mauricierre De Govia FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 415 89th Street Brooklyn New York 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4862 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Robert Ciulla Theresa Buono Daniela Camilleri Lorraine Torres N/A N/A N/A N/A Heather Tardugno James Watters Lillian Shek *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Chairperson/Assistant Principal Teacher Parent   Name Carolyn Mazza Sabrina Pei Genevive Mammana Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Dyker Heights prides itself on servicing students of all academic levels and works diligently with teachers, staff, and parents, to meet the needs of all its students. Dyker Heights' instructional focus is to ensure teachers provide every student, every day the highest quality of instruction as evidenced in their classroom through: 1 ) A visible and clearly stated learning objective for the lesson of the day,   2) A rigorous curriculum delivered through inquiry based instruction. Teachers work with students to help them become independent, motivated learners, and critical thinkers. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Dyker Heights is a middle school serving 1,522 students from grades six through 8 in District 20. The school population comprises of 1% Black, 14% Hispanic, 40% White and 45% Asian students. The student body includes 10% English Language Learners and 13% Special Education students. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017-2018 was 97%. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Education Students and ENL Students 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. According to the Framework for Great Schools Report 2016, Dyker Heights I.S. 201 made progress in the area of rigorous instruction. Our program/instruction is customized to meet the needs of all learners: students with disabilities that require an Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) class, self contained students, English Language Learners, and those students that require occasional supports. I.S 201 challenges students through research based instructional methodologies and supports students through multiple entry points and differentiated tasks to ensure all students meet and exceed their learning goals and reach their potential. One key area of focus is to continue to foster strong family community relationships which in turn will strengthen both the academic and social emotional needs of our students. Increasing communication with families will allow for additional targeted interventions and supports for all students. Time is allocated weekly, for teachers to meet with parents to review student progress and plan together to meet the needs of their students. Based on the Framework for Great Schools Report 2016, I.S 201 has made progress in the component of collaboration of teachers. At I.S 201, teachers work collaboratively within and across content areas to improve upon student success by focusing professional learning time on student work inquiry and analyzing data from summative and formative assessments for feedback. Teachers discuss next steps and research based instructional strategies to help support and challenge students in exceeding common core learning standards (CCLS). One key area of focus is to continue to strengthen the quality of student discussion and higher level questioning to deepen students' critical thinking. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K201 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1584 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 41 38 19 29 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 38 33 26 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 75.0% % Attendance Rate 65.8% % Reduced Lunch 9.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 15.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 31.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.18 0% 1% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 73.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO NO YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 99 98 20 97.2% 9.4% 13.4% 0.6% 51.8% 0.6% 6 15% 9.2 71.8% 82% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the Framework for Great Schools Report 2016, New York City School Survey, and teacher feedback, Dyker Heights I.S. 201 made progress in the area of rigorous instruction. Our program/instruction is customized to meet the needs of all learners: students with disabilities that require an Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) class, self contained students, English Language Learners, and those students that require occasional supports. There is a need to ensure the implementation of a year-long Common Core State Standards aligned curriculum in English Language Arts and Math using the respective DOE Core Instructional Materials, Scholastic Common Core Code X and Go Math, and teacher created Common Core Learning Standard (CCLS) instructional units of study. Instructional units will offer a higher level of scaffolding instruction - multiple entry points, differentiated tasks- to help all students meet and exceed their learning goals. Key areas of focus are improving quality of student discussion and higher level questioning to foster more independent, motivated critical thinkers. In order to evaluate the impact of instruction/curriculum on student learning, we are implementing continuous formative and summative assessments throughout all content areas. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, staff will be able to create a rigorous learning environment that is visibly coherent throughout the school allowing all students to be exposed to higher order thinking and questioning skills as measured by observations and student work which will result in a 5% increase of students scoring at or above proficiency level as measured by the New York State English Language Arts Assessment. 2 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students and teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Administration and Teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Teachers will design units of study across content areas aligned with ELA Common Core State Standards and the established curricula of Code X Tasks will allow for differentiation and encourage students to explore the curriculum through multiple entry points. Teachers will collaborate during common planning time in order to review student work, discuss results, and devise a plan incorporate best practices and multiple entry points to assist students, especially English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities in achieving their learning goals. Push-In and resource teachers of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities, will collaborate to discuss differentiated instructional strategies, and inquiry based learning tasks, to promote greater student participation and success. ● Teachers will work in grade level, departments, and inquiry teams to review periodic assessments, lesson plans, and student work to analyze performance of students and assess effectiveness of their lesson, curriculum, and tasks. ● Teachers will continue to receive professional development and engage in inter-class visitations to develop best practices. Teachers will receive Professional Development on Shared Inquiry Discussion. Shared Inquiry Discussion is a student led discussion where the teacher speaks only to facilitate and direct the conversation, but where students construct knowledge themselves. Students have the opportunity to read and annotate sources to help them research, formulate and present their findings. ● Supplemental resources, such as Achieve 3000, will be used to support English Language Learners and students with disabilities All students and teachers. September 2018 to June 2019 Administration and Teachers 3  by allowing them to explore the same content but progress at their own rate. ● Teachers will design lessons with key scaffolds in mind, to break down texts into manageable chunks, provide multiple entry points through cooperative learning tasks and peer tutoring. ● Teachers will implement stations for sub-grouping allowing students to meet for small group instruction based on their need and to allow them to engage in rigorous tasks embedded in the curriculum. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. From September 2018 to June 2019, the Cabinet will meet with the Parent Coordinator to plan parent workshops throughout the course of the 2018-2019 school year. The teachers will assist in providing workshops to support families in assisting their children at home. Families will be invited to workshops to learn and engage in inquiry based strategies. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Prep Coverage, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Literacy Coach, Data-specialist, Achieve 3000 program, English Language Learner Coordinator, Professional Development Facilitator, Instructional Lead Teacher, Per-Session and Per-Diem for Content Specialist, and Professional Learning Teams. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will administer quarterly post assessments to determine if students are making progress towards their learning goals. In addition, teachers will administer a periodic assessment baseline in the beginning of the 2018-2019 school year, and then administer a benchmark in February, 2019, to identify student progress. The teachers will monitor progress throughout the year and make adjustments to support student progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 4  Periodic baseline assessment in September 2018, quarterly post assessments, benchmark assessment in February 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Dyker Heights I.S 201 sets high expectations for teachers, students, and parents, providing the necessary supports to establish clarity around student goals. According to the New York City School Survey 2016-2017, 89% of students responded positively to questions about supportive environment. I.S 201 will continue to foster a culture where students feel safe, are challenged to grow, and supported to meet high expectations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2018, I.S 201 will strive to create a supportive environment that challenges students to grow and feel supported to meet high expectations resulting in a 10% in the component of supportive environment as measured by the New York City School Survey. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).   Teachers will have time during teacher team inquiry meetings and common planning periods to design and refine student assessments. Teachers will share and discuss progress reports on assessments and rubrics on student writing pieces/projects, determine next steps, and research instructional strategies that best support students' learning goals.  Grade assemblies will be held with Assistant Principals and Guidance Counselors to ensure that students understand their learning goals and next steps to be college and career ready. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom Teachers, Students, and Administration September 2018 to June 2019 Administration and Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Special Education, and ELL Teachers  A supplemental resource, such as Achieve 3000, will be used to support English Language Learners and students with disabilities by allowing them to explore the same content but progress at their own rate. Teachers will discuss Achieve 3000 results by identifying their lexile level and provide students next steps to improve performance.  Teachers will design lessons with key scaffolds in mind, to break down texts into manageable chunks, provide multiple entry points through cooperative learning tasks and peer tutoring. Through the use of rubrics and teacher peer feedback, students will be able to articulate the standards they are learning, why they are learning it, and next steps to improve performance.  Teachers will implement stations for sub-grouping allowing students to meet for small group instruction based on their need and to allow them to engage in more rigorous tasks embedded in the curriculum. English Language Learner Specialist, Special Education Teachers, Classroom Teachers, ELL and SWD students.  The parent coordinator and content teachers will hold workshops to assist parents in supporting their children's education at home. These include Social Studies and Science Fair projects, Preparing for the English Language Arts and Math State Exams, and helping parents of the English Language Learners Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Administration September 2018 to June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Administration 7 understand the New York State English as a Second Language Assessment Test (NYSESLAT) exam. Additionally, the parent coordinator will collaborate with the principal and guidance counselors to provide workshops to parents throughout the year in how to become actively involved in the decisions of their children's education.. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. During the 2018-2019 school year, the Cabinet will meet with the Parent Coordinator to plan parent workshops throughout the course of the 2018-2019 school year. The teachers will assist in providing workshops to support families in assisting their children at home. High expectations will be communicated through school wide e-mails, postings/charts, school website, faculty/departmental conferences, teacher team inquiry meetings, professional learning communities, pre/post formal and informal observations, facilitator meetings, common planning periods, and progress reports sent home to families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Prep coverage, Data-specialist, Literacy Coach, Achieve 3000 program, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Professional Development Facilitator, Instructional Lead Teacher, English Language Learner Coordinator, Per-Session and Per-Diem for Content Specialist and supervisor, and Professional Learning Teams. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The administration and teachers will reflect on progress towards the goal. Administration will periodically survey the teachers to assess their needs and support the expectations of the school community. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Periodic baseline assessment in September 2018, quarterly post assessments, benchmark assessment in February 2019 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the NYC School Survey 2016-2017 teacher observations/feedback, there is a need for a visible coherence and alignment of teacher strategies, which consistently provide multiple entry points so that all learners are challenged across all classrooms. Teachers need additional time to work with their peers to share, refine and implement best practices. Best practices will be shared across the school community through inter-class visitations and learning walks. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 95% of teachers will move toward improvement in component 3b and 3d in Danielson’s Framework for Effective Teaching as evidenced by their formal and informal observations, and by having staff share their best practices,/instructional practices with their colleagues to strengthen their teacher performance in these two components. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Inter-class visitations will be scheduled to highlight components of effective instruction and additional support will be provided to teachers through professional learning videos that will allow faculty to build a shared school wide understanding of what effective teaching looks like in all content areas. Classroom Teachers, Students and Administration September 2018 to June 2019 Administration and Teachers Learning walks will be conducted throughout the year to allow teachers to examine best practices with their colleagues. Teachers will visit the English Language Learner specialist and pull out Special Education Teachers (12:1, SETSS, ICT Part Time) during inter-class visitations and learning walks, as they examine the various methodologies and strategies that are implements for instruction. English Language Learner teachers, Special Education teachers, and will meet in their professional learning communities to discuss student data, share best practices and scaffolding techniques, plan differentiate tasks to meet the needs of English Language Learners and Students with disabilities. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement English Language Learner September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Special Education Specialist, Special Education Teachers, and ELL and SWD students How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the 2018-2019 school year, families will be invited to workshops to learn key instructional practices and how to help their child learn best at home. Important information will be communicated to parents in native languages and the school website will also relay information in native languages. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1  Prep Coverage, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Literacy Coach, Data-specialist, Achieve 3000 program, English Language Learner Coordinator, Professional Development Facilitator, Instructional Lead Teacher, Per-Session and Per-Diem for Content Specialist, and Professional Learning Teams. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February, teachers will meet to provide feedback/reflection on Inter-class Visitations, learning walks, and inquiry work and make adjustments if needed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Pre/Post Formal and Informal Observations, weekly departmental meetings, and teacher team meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2016-2017 NYC School Survey and the 2017-2018 teacher observations/feedback, there is a need for a visible coherence and alignment of teacher strategies, which consistently provide multiple entry points so that all learners are challenged across all classrooms. Teachers need additional time to work with their peers to share, refine and implement best practices. Best practices will be shared across the school community through school wide emails, postings/charts, school website, faculty/departmental conferences, teacher inquiry team meetings, professional learning communities, pre/post formal and informal observations, facilitator meetings, and common planning periods. Teachers will attend professional development and turnkey for the rest of the staff. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The administration will meet monthly to analyze multiple types of data, to monitor teacher performance, student achievement, and professional development plans to further support teacher and student growth. The administration will attend inquiry team meetings to provide teachers support and strategies to continue to promote student growth. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration will analyze data collected from teacher observations, baseline and benchmark assessments, student work and provide instructional support to all staff. Administration, Guidance Counselors, Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Guidance Counselors, Teachers All teachers attend professional development in the school and through opportunities provided by the network. They are then expected to turnkey for the rest of the staff. In addition, classrooms are set up as lab sites for inter-visitation among the staff. This will lead to distributive leadership of teachers across grades and content areas. Grade assemblies will be held with Principal, Assistant Principals, and Guidance Counselors to ensure that students understand expectations, learning goals, and next steps to be college and career ready. Teacher Inquiry Teams and Professional Learning Communities will meet to review student work and develop lessons aligned to the Common Core State Standards for each unit of study relative to Scholastic Code X and Go Math. Teacher teams will develop interpretive questions for each unit of study that encourage student led discussion and inquiry, share effective instructional practices that address the standards, and adjust curriculum to provide multiple entry points so that all learners are challenged across all classrooms. Content Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Content Teachers 4  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. From September 2018 to June 2019 the principal, parent coordinator, and content teachers will hold workshops to assist parents in supporting their children's education at home and how to become actively involved in decision making. Important information will be communicated to parents in native languages through the school website and school-wide newsletters. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Prep Coverage, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Literacy Coach, Data-specialist, Achieve 3000 program, English Language Learner Coordinator, Professional Development Facilitator, Instructional Lead Teacher, Per-Session and Per-Diem for Content Specialist, and Professional Learning Teams. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A school wide parent, teacher, community survey will be administered in January, 2019 to gather feedback and assess progress. Changes will be made as needed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. school-wide parent, teacher community survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the New York City School Survey 2015-2016, the parental survey response was 89% in which parents/guardians felt strongly that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs. There is a need to increase parental involvement in school wide events, orientations, conferences, and workshops. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 the school community will be able to increase strong family community ties 10% ( as measured by the NYC School Survey) by offering, welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community based organizations throughout the school year. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers will communicate with parents weekly during Tuesday parent meetings. At that time, parents will be informed of their child’s progress, learning goals, interventions, activities/strategies that can be reinforced at home, and upcoming parent workshops and events. Teachers may also communicate with parents daily through the use of the school website and Remind101 to inform them of lessons, assessments, writing pieces, upcoming class projects and other curriculum highlights. Pupil Path will be implemented during the 2017-2018 school year to increase communication between school and family community. Provide opportunities for staff, students, and parents to recognize emotions in self and others and understand how to regulate emotions effectively to support the success and development of students' overall being. Afterschool programs have been established to address the interest and needs of SWD and ELL students. In addition, ELL students may attend the Saturday Morning ELL Academy for additional support. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Paras Administration, Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator, Paras September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Paras, ESL Coordinator Administration, Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator, Paras, ESL Coordinator 7  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. During the 2018-2019 school year, the administration, teachers, guidance counselors, parent coordinator, and paras we will increase parental involvement through: Morning and Evening Parent Workshops, Family Events, Fairs, Plays Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The administration, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Parent-Teacher Association, Paraprofessionals, Outside Community Personnel. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, a school wide parent teacher community survey will be administered to gather feedback, assess progress and address needs of the school community. Progress will also be monitored through parent sign-in logs to workshops, orientations, and school events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. school-wide parent teacher community survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group Small group Small group Small group After school Wednesday and Thursday, and Saturday mornings After school Wednesday and Thursday, and Saturday mornings After school Wednesday and Thursday, and Saturday mornings After school Wednesday and Thursday, and Saturday mornings Small group and/or one to one During the school day Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Promotional Excellence Program and Saturday Academy for ELL Students Promotional Excellence Program and Saturday Academy for ELL Students Promotional Excellence Program and Saturday Academy for ELL Students Promotional Excellence Program and Saturday Academy for ELL Students At Risk services provided by Guidance Counselors, School Psychologists and content teachers. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Below Proficiency level Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Below proficiency level Below proficiency level Below proficiency level Students that fall below proficiency levels and those that are identified and recommendedby thePupil Personnel Team members (Guidance counselors, School Psychologists, and Social Worker). 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 0 (none) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 0 Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 0 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  0 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 0 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. New hires are licensed in their content areas. Teachers are assigned to programs in their licensed areas and grade levels. Professional Development is provided in content areas through teacher team meetings, and monthly faculty/departmental conferences. Lead teachers, CCLS Coach and others attend professional development in their content areas provided by Network and/or professional development opportunities outside of school. Instructional lead teachers in ELA, Math, Science,Social Studies and CCLS Coach attend Professional Development opportunities outside the school and turnkey their learning to their colleagues through Faculty/Departmental Conferences and teacher team inquiry meetings. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Lead teachers, CCLS Coach and others will attend professional development in their content areas provided by Brooklyn Bourough South 4 support center, professional development opportunities offered outside of school, webinars and professional development provided within the school. Instructional lead teachers in ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies and CCLS Coach attend Professional Development opportunities outside the school and turnkey their learning to their colleagues through Faculty/Departmental Conferences and teacher team inquiry meetings. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2  n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. During Monthly Faculty/Departmental meetings, inquiry team meetings and common prep periods, teacher teams meet to review student data and identify deficit areas. Depending on the identified deficit area, teachers select an appropriate assessment measure. Administration, CCLS Coach and teacher team leaders provide professional development in how to use assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher teams engage in a discussion of scaffolding strategies to address students’ needs. Teachers create assessments to monitor/evaluate student progress and plan future instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 3  Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 921,715.00 Title II, Part A Federal 0 Title III, Part A Federal 19,150.00 references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X Column B Section Reference(s) -CEP Overview, -Section 5a Action Plan and Budget and resource alignment -Section 5b-Progress monitoring -Section 5c-Needs Assessment, and Action Plan -CEP Overview, -Section 5a Action Plan and Budget and resource alignment -Section 5b-Progress monitoring -Section 5c-Needs Assessment, and Action Plan Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Local 0 8,639,883.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 4  combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy DYKER HEIGHTS INTERMEDIATE SCHOO0L Robert Ciulla, Principal Title I Parent Involvement Policy 2018-2019 I. General Expectations I.S. 201 agrees to implement the following statutory requirements: The school will put into operation programs, activities and procedures for the involvement of parents, consistent with section 1118 of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). Those programs, activities and procedures will be planned and operated with meaningful consultation with parents of participating children. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  The school will ensure that the required school-level parental involvement policy meets the requirements of section 1118(b) of the ESSA, and includes, as a component, a school-parent compact consistent with section 1118(d) of the ESSA.  The school will incorporate this parental involvement policy into its school improvement plan.  In carrying out the Title I, Part A parental involvement requirements, to the extent practicable, the school will provide full opportunities for the participation of parents with limited English proficiency, parents with disabilities, and parents of migratory children, including providing information and school reports required 6  under section 1111 of the ESSA in an understandable and uniform format and, including alternative formats upon request, and, to the extent practicable, in a language parents understand.  The school will involve the parents of children served in Title I, Part A programs in decisions about how the 1 percent of Title I, Part A funds reserved for parental involvement is spent.  The school will be governed by the following statutory definition of parental involvement, and will carry out programs, activities and procedures in accordance with this definition: Parental involvement means the participation of parents in regular, two-way, and meaningful communication involving student academic learning and other school activities, including ensuring— o o o that parents play an integral role in assisting their child’s learning; that parents are encouraged to be actively involved in their child’s education at school; that parents are full partners in their child’s education and are included, as appropriate, in decision-making and on advisory committees to assist in the education of their child; the carrying out of other activities, such as those described in section 1118 of the ESSA. o The school will inform parents and parental organizations of the purpose and existence of the Parental Information and Resource Center in the State. o II. Description of How School Will Implement Required Parental Involvement Policy Components Parental Involvement and School Quality 1. 2. 3. I.S. 201 will take the following actions to involve parents in the joint development of the District Parental Involvement plan (contained in the RDCEP/DCEP Addendum) under Section 1112 – Local Educational Agency Plans of the ESSA: The P.T.A. will send a representative. I.S. 201 will take the following actions to involve parents in the process of school review and improvement under Section 116 – Academic Assessment and Local Educational Agency and School Improvement of ESSA: The P.T.A. has set up a Title One Committee and will hold a Title One Committee meeting prior to October 30, 2017. I.S. 201 will provide the following necessary coordination, technical assistance, and other support in planning and implementing effective parental involvement activities to improve student academic achievement and school performance: The P.T.A will give feedback to the Principal through the School Leadership Team meetings, from P.T.A. meetings and also through our Parent Coordinator. 4. I.S. 201 will coordinate and integrate parental involvement strategies in Title I, Part A with parental involvement strategies under the other programs:  Conducting an after-school program called Promotion Excellence to aid struggling students. This will aid parents in becoming involved with the academic program for struggling students.  Teachers will be urged to communicate to parents on the school website, this will enable parents to have a resource to keep informed of assignments, projects and tests as well as the teacher’s requirements for success in the class.  Teachers will be urged to keep lines of communication open with parents, through the use of PupilPath, phone-calls, emails, Remind101, and utilize allocated time on Tuesday’s to contact and meet with parents. 5. I.S. 201 will take the following actions to conduct, with the involvement of parents, an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parental involvement policy in improving the quality of its Title I Part A program. The evaluation will include identifying barriers to greater participation by parents in parental involvement activities (with particular attention to parents who are economically disadvantaged, are disabled, have limited English proficiency, have limited literacy, or are of any racial or ethnic minority background). The school will use the findings of the evaluation of its parental involvement policy and activities to design strategies for more effective parental involvement, and to revise, if necessary (and with the involvement of 7  parents) its parental involvement policies. The P.T.A will conduct a Title One Meeting. The Chairperson will communicate the evaluation to the Principal.: 6. I.S. 201 will build the parents’ capacity for strong parental involvement, in order to ensure effective involvement of parents and to support a partnership among the school involved parents and the community to improve student academic achievement through the following activities specifically described below: 1. The school will provide assistance to parents of children served by the school, as appropriate, in understanding topics such as the following, by undertaking the actions described in this paragraph – 1. The State’s academic content standards; 2. The State’s student academic achievement standards; 3. The state and local academic assessments including alternate assessments, the requirements of Part A, how to monitor their child’s progress, and how to work with educators: The school will conduct workshops for parents coordinated by the Parent Coordinator. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. I.S. 201 will provide materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their children’s academic achievement, such as literacy training, and using technology, as appropriate, to foster parental involvement by: conducting workshops for parents. The School Administration and Parent Coordinator will maintain communication with the P.T.A. and parents to consider informative workshops for parents. Topics may include: How to put together a project for a school fair, technology training, understanding curriculum and assessment expectations, accessing community and support services. I.S. 201 will, with the assistance of the district and parents, educate its teachers, pupil services personnel, principals and other staff in how to reach out to, communicate with and work with parents as equal partners, in the value and utility of contributions of parents, and how to implement and coordinate parent programs and build ties between parents and schools by: professional development at Faculty and Departmental Meetings, individual meetings with the Guidance Counselors, with the Parent Coordinator and schedule additional meetings, with flexible times, such as meeting in the morning or afternoon to meet with individual parents. I.S. 201 will, to the extent feasible and appropriate, coordinate and integrate parental involvement programs and activities with Head Start, Reading First, Early Reading First, Even Start, Home Instruction Programs for Preschool Youngsters, the Parents as Teachers Program, and public pre-school and other programs and conduct and/or encourage participation in activities, such as parent resource centers, that encourage and support parents in more fully participating in the education of their children by: conducting informative workshops for parents. I.S. 201 will take the following actions to ensure that information related to the school and parent-programs, meetings and other activities, is sent to parents of Title I participating children in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon request, and, to the extent practicable, in a language the parents can understand: The school will send letters home. They will be translated into different languages to foster communication with parents. The school will provide interpretation services during meetings and events as needed. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement III. Discretionary School Parental Involvement Policy Components The School Parental Involvement Policy may include additional paragraphs listing and describing other discretionary activities that the school, in consultation with its parents, chooses to undertake to build parents’ capacity for involvement in the school and school system to support their children’s academic achievement, such as the following discretionary activities listed under section 1118(e) of the ESSA: 8   involving parents in the development of training for teachers, principals, and other educators to improve the effectiveness of that training;  providing necessary literacy training for parents from Title I, Part A funds, if the school district has exhausted all other reasonably available sources of funding for that training;  paying reasonable and necessary expenses associated with parental involvement activities, including   transportation and child care costs, to enable parents to participate in school-related meetings and training sessions; training parents to enhance the involvement of other parents; in order to maximize parental involvement and participation in their children’s education, arranging school meetings at a variety of times, or conducting in-home conferences between teachers or other educators, who work directly with participating children, with parents who are unable to attend those conferences at school; adopting and implementing model approaches to improving parental involvement;   developing appropriate roles for community-based organizations and businesses, including faith-based organizations, in parental involvement activities; and  providing other reasonable support for parental involvement activities under section 1118 as parents may request. IV. Adoption This School Parental Involvement Policy has been developed jointly with, and agreed on with, parents of children participating in Title I, Part A programs, as evidenced by this meeting. This policy was adopted by I.S. 201 on 10/2017 and will be in effect for the period of 2018-2019 The school will distribute this policy to all parents of participating Title I, Part A children on or before December 23, 2018. Principal’s Signature: Robert Ciulla Date: October, 2017 School-Parent Compact (SPC) DYKER HEIGHTS INTERMEDIATE SCHOOL Robert Ciulla, Principal School Parent Compact 2018-2019 I.S. 201, and the parents of the students participating in activities, services, and programs funded by Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA)(Participating children), agree that this compact outlines how the parents, the entire school staff, and the students will share the responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which the school and parents will build and develop a partnership that will help children achieve the State’s high standards. This school-parent compact is in effect during the school year 2018-2019. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Required School-Parent Compact Provisions 9  School Responsibilities I.S. 201 will:  provide high quality curriculum and instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment that enables the participating children to meet the State’s student academic achievement standards as follows: by having homerooms, having guidance counselors work will all students, using academic learning time efficiently, implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards, offering high quality instruction in all content areas, providing instruction by quality teachers, and providing incentives for high achievement.  hold parent-teacher conferences during which this Compact will be discussed as it relates to the individual child’s achievement. Specifically, those conferences will be held: Monthly P.T.A. meetings  provide parents with frequent reports on their children’s progress. Specifically, the school will provide reports as follows: Report cards will be distributed 4 times a year. Children will bring home and returned signed, and providing parents with timely information regarding performance and student assessment results.  provide parents reasonable access to staff. Specifically, staff will be available for consultation with parents as follows: 4 Parent-Teacher conferences this year. Parents can make appointments to meet with staff as needed. Time is allocated every Tuesday afternoon for parent-teacher meetings. Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents. Teachers will utilize the school website to communicate with parents on a regular basis.  provide opportunities to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities as follows: Parents can volunteer for trips, P.T.A. functions and other school functions.  involve parents in the planning, review, and improvement of the school’s parental involvement policy, in an organized, ongoing, and timely way.  hold an annual meeting to inform parents of the school’s participation in Title I, Part A programs and to explain the Title I, Part A requirements, and the right of parents to be involved in Title I, Part A programs. The school will convene the meeting at a convenient time to parents, and will offer a flexible number of additional parental involvement meetings, such as in the morning or evening, so that as many parents as possible are able to attend. The school will invite to this meeting all parents of children participating in Title I, Part A programs (participating students), and will encourage them to attend.  provide information to parents of participating students in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon the request of parents with disabilities, and to the extent practicable, in a language that parents can understand.  provide to parents of participating children information in a timely manner about Title I, Part A programs that includes a description and explanation of the school’s curriculum, the forms of academic assessment used to measure children’s progress, and the proficiency levels students are expected to meet.  on the request of parents, provide opportunities for regular meetings for parents to formulate suggestions, and to participate, as appropriate, in decisions about the education of their children. The school will respond to any such suggestions as soon as practicably possible. For example, arranging meetings at flexible times for those parents that can’t attend a regular meeting.  Provide to each parent an individual student report about the performance of their child on the State Assessment in at least math, language arts, and reading. 0   "Provide each parent timely notice when their child has been assigned or has been taught for four(4) or more consecutive weeks by a teacher who is not highly qualified within the meaning of the term in section 200.56 of the Title I (i.e. as per ESSA" Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the community. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships During the 2018-2019 School Year, teachers will communicate to parents through the school website, PupilPath, Remind101, phone calls and emails to ensure that parents are able to assist students at home. The school will send out notices and news letters translated in parents' native languages. I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff There will be four Parent-Teacher conferences during the 2017-2018 school year. Parents can make appointments to meet with the staff as needed. Time is allocated every Tuesday afternoon from 2:20-3:00 for parent-teacher meetings. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents The School Administration, teachers, guidance counselors and parent coordinator will maintain communication with parents to provide informative workshops for parents. Topics may include: How to put together a project for a school fair, technology training, understanding curriculum and assessment expectations, accessing community and support services. Parents will be able to make appointments as needed, with the above personnel. Parent Responsibilities II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities We as parents will, support out children in the following ways:  Supporting my child’s learning by making education a priority in our home by: *Making sure my child is on time and prepared every day for school; monitoring attendance. *Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age. *talking with my child about his/her activities every day *scheduling daily homework time *providing an environment conducive for study *making sure that homework is completed *monitoring the amount of television my children watch 1   Volunteering in my child’s classroom or assist from home as time permits.  Participating, as appropriate, in decisions relating to my children’s education  Participating in school activities on a regular basis  Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations  Promoting positive use of my child’s extracurricular time   Staying informed about my child’s education and communicating with the school promptly, reading all notices from the school or the school district wither received by my child or by mail and responding as appropriate. Serving, to the extent possible, on policy advisory groups, such as being the Title I, Part A parent representative on the schools’ School Improvement Team, the Title I Policy Advisory Committee, the District Wide Policy Advisory Council, the State’s Committee of Practioners, the School Support Team or other school advisory or policy groups.  Reading together with my child every day  Communicating positive values and character traits, such as, respect, hard work, responsibility  Respecting the cultural different of others.  Helping my child accept consequences for negative behavior.  Being aware of and following rules and regulations of the school and district.   Express high expectations and offer praise and encouragement for achievement. Supporting the school’s discipline policy. Student Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities We, as students, will share the responsibility to improve our academic achievement and achieve the State’s high standards. Specifically, we will:  Attend school regularly and arrive on time  Do my homework every day and ask for help when I need to  Read at least 30 minutes every day outside of school time. Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions.  Show respect for myself and other people and property.   Give to my parents or the adult who is responsible for my welfare all notices and information received by me from my school every day.  Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully.  Always try my best to learn. 2  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: The Dyker Heights This school is (check one): DBN: 20K201 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 6 2 4 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Saturday ELL Academy Program will be made available starting February 2, 2019 and end after the state exams for the immigrant children. In order to better prepare students for the NYSESLAT and State Exams, the Saturday ELL Program has to begin in January to ensure all students complete program before test. All grades are welcome to attend; 6th, 7th and 8th. The program will be divided into sub-groups, entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding and commanding. This program will be focused on developing and reinforcing the English language using the four modalitites (Reading, Writing, Listening and Speaking), as well as preparing the students for the NYSESLAT and ELA state test. The program will take place on Saturdays from 9:00 am to 12:00 pm This program will be offered by 6 teachers, 2 certified ESL teachers, 2 Special Education teachers and 2 content area teachers. The 2 ESL certified teacher will be pushing in with the four teachers to deliver instruction. NY Ready materials will be utilized to deliver instruction. The Supplemental and distinct materials IS 201 will use will be Achieve 3000 and Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT and Beyond, by Attanasio & Associates, Inc. for ELL's for the Saturday Program. The Achieve 3000 program is a computer-based differentiated reading and writing program that reaches students at his or her individual reading level. The program has proved to accelerate reading comprehension, vocabulary and writing proficiency. This program will be provided to the struggling ENL students to provide English intervention services. Teachers will prepare and incorporate lessons that will promote socialization, accountability , word pronunciation and recognition. Since this is a differentiated program, all ENL subgroups and grade levels will be served. The Language of instruction is delivered in English. Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT and Beyond program will be incorporated in the program for ELL students. The focus of this program will be to prepare the students to build strong language and literacy skills through Speaking, Writing, Listening and Reading skills . The lessons will include rigorous and differentiated tasks that are aligned with the CCLS. A supervisor will be included in this program, since this will be the only program running in the building. Student attendance will be recorded and records will be maintained by the teachers/supervisor. Parent notifications will be sent home in parents' preferred language. 4  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: To ensure the students will be receiving best practices in instruction, the staff will be receiving ongoing professional development . Professional Development on Text Complexity and Reading in the Content Area - methodologies on teaching language, learning, and literacy through ELA instruction to ELL's. Professional Development to support teachers through advanced literacy focusing on the Four Hallmarks: Engaging Texts, Rich Discussions, Frequent Writing and Academic Vocabulary and Language, using the book, and the use of the Teaching Advanced Literacy Skills Textbook, written by Nonic K. Lesaux, Emily Phillips Galloway and Sky H. Marietta. Professional Development on Achieve3000 - assigning tasks, reviewing student progress and accessing data reports, determining and tracking student lexile level to support reading for the ELL Population. Achieve 3000 includes Key Features- The new 5 step literacy routine for students to follow during use : 1. Students will be able to Read and respond to email, 2. Read the article of the day, 3. Do activity questions 4. Answer thought questions 5. Vote in the poll. Professional development will also be provided on: How to use Lexile to differentiate instruction and How to set up classes. Achieve 3000 supports the objectives set forth by the Common Core State Standards. ESL , Special Education and ELA Teachers will attend this workshop. Those Professional Development Sessions will allow teachers to analyze/utilize student data to enhance student academic success. Agendas will be provided, attendance will be recorded and maintained by the supervisor. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: At the beginning of the school year, 2018-2019, Mrs. Kelly (Parent Coordinator) provided parents a survey/questionnaire requesting information on parent needs. Professional Development will be provided to meet their needs. October 16, 2018 - an annual ELL informational meeting was held with the parents to review the academic and instructional needs of their children. This meeting will take place in the school library. Mr. Ciulla, Principal, Ms. Markovich (ELL Coordinator) , Mr. Weislogel, the Assistant Principal, Mrs. Kelly, the Parent Coordinator and Bilingual Paras were present to conduct the meeting. Agendas were provided, attendance was taken and parents watched instructional videos in their preferred language. Throughout the year Parent meetings and activities will take place to 5  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities inform parents of progress their child has made, and also provide them with information regarding their child's education. Topics to be covered will consist of: *6th Grade Orientation *Meet and Greet Parent Night *ELA and Math workshops-by ELA and Math Facilitators *Family Magic Night *High School Workshop *ELL Parent Orientation *Project for fairs workshop *Internet Safety Parent Workshop *Open school *Book Fair-Come with your Child *NYSESLAT Parent Workshop The school staff will provide and present the workshops. Translators will be present at all parent activities. Parents will be notified through School Messenger in their preferred language, School Website, Backpacked. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Nine Week Program: 1/26, 2/2, 2/9, 3/2, 3/9, 3/16, 3/23, 3/30, 4/6 and 4/13/2019 Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other 6 teachers 3 hours each per week for 9 weeks and 1 Assistant Principal $19,534.00 6 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. TOTAL $19,534.00 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 20 School Name DYKER HEIGHTS INTERMEDIATE SCHOOL Borough Brooklyn School Number 201 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal ROBERT CIULLA Coach VEENA VEERAMAH ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher MS.IOFFE/MS.MARTINEZ Teacher/Subject Area MS. MOSHKOVICH/SCIENCE Teacher/Subject Area MS. MARKOVICH/ELA Related-Service Provider MS. MASRY Superintendent MS. COSTANTINO Assistant Principal ROBERT WEISLOGEL Coach MS. KOUKOULIS School Counselor MS. MASRY Parent type here Parent Coordinator MARGO KELLY Field Support Center Staff Member JOANN BENOIT Other (Name and Title) MS. KOUKOULIS/ESL/MATH C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 3 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 6 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 8  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1471 Total number of ELLs 128 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.70% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Ell periodic assessments are used to assess the early literacy skills of the Ell students. By using the assessments, teachers are able to identify deficit areas, scaffold instruction accordingly. Teachers meet in teams, discuss strategies to address areas of need, and set instructional goals. Teacher created assessments are utilized to determine areas of strength/deficit in letter and sound recognition, phonics development, oral reading, comprehension, and writing. This will give teachers an indication where to begin with the students as well as determine how much growth a child needs to meet his/her individual goals. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 9  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our program for ELLs is based on how much ELLs have improved in a three year span on the NYSESLAT and NYS ELA exam. Data sources to be reviewed include RLAT, past RNMRs, School Report Card and subgroups. Throughout the course of a year, ELL periodic assessments are used to identify whether students have made gains within deficit area. Teacher teams review benchmark unit assessments as well as writing portfolios to determine whether students are mastering CCLS standards. The results from Achieve 3000 are used to determine whether students are progressing in reading levels (progression to 2 reading levels above current level is considered improvement). 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT report indicates that the ELLs data pattern across proficiency levels have increased based on the report from 2011 to 2013. Data shows that students in a three year span have increased from a beginners, entering level to a higher level of proficiency. Reports also indicate students progressing with gains throughout the modalities though very few are still at the same proficiency level. The NYSITELL is a test given to the new students that enter the New York City school system for the first time. Results indicate that students that have recently entered the United States and speak very little or no English are at a low raw level. When students take the NYSESLAT in the Spring their scores indicate a rise from entering or emerging score to a higher intermediate level score. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 1a. Instruction is delivered in a push-in(co-teaching) program. As part of the push in program, ESL teachers facilitate instruction by implementing ESL methodologies to accommodate students. We also provide ESL services as part of stand alone model for students who have entering/emerging scores in NYSESLAT and NYSITELL . ELL-SWDs are put into group sizes based on their IEP, and the ENL teacher services them based on the mandated number of units as a push-in model ( using all 6 co-teaching approaches). All ENL classes are heterogeneously grouped with varied proficiency levels. Teachers differentiate instruction to meet students' diverse academic needs by providing visual aids, hands on manipulatives, and incorporating a buddying system in which students who share the same native language are grouped together. Teachers utilize Google Translate to assist students in vocabulary development/ comprehension and incorporate native language books and bilingual dictionaries to help students make connections 0  in a cultural and linguistic context. Push-in teachers use co-teaching approaches like "one teach, one observe; one teach, one drift; station teaching; parallel teaching; alternative teaching;team teaching". Integrated English as a new language is deliveredin Push-in /Stand Alone model in which students receive core content area (i.e., English language arts, math, science, or social studies) and English language development instruction from a dually certified teacher or two certified teachers Paste response to questions here: b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We have six ESL certified teachers. Four ESL teachers serve as content teachers incorporating ESL methodologies during instruction and two ESL teachers provide push-in and stand alone services. Students with entering proficiency level in English are provided with one unit of study in ENL (180 min.) as a Stand Alone model with ESOL certified teacher and one unit in ENL/ELA (180 min.)as a Push-in model with contemt area and ESOL certified teachers. The ESL teachers provide the mandated 180 or 360 instructional minutes of ENL for ELL students, and 90 min units for former ELLs . When programming, the mandated number of ESL periods is incorporated within the students' schedule. Entering and Emerging proficiency level students are provided with 360 minutes ESL instruction per week. Transitional and Expanding proficiency level students are provided with 180 minutes of ESL instruction per week. And former ELLs continue to receive ESL services of 90 minutes per week for additional two years. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. During content area instruction, teachers incorporate ESL methodologies. Teachers differentiate by providing visual aids and hands on manipulatives. Teachers incorporate native language books to assist students in making connections. Teachers also allow students to use bilingual/English-English dictionaries in order to build academic vocabulary. Scholastic Common Core Code X is implemented in ELA. Routines and scaffolding strategies (such as the use of rubrics for reading ,writing, speaking, listening; the use of graphic organizers) that are practiced through Common Core Code X are incorporated throughout all content areas. All ELLs are using Achieve 3000 and Stadlier-Oxford Vocabulary Workshop. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELL students are screened appropriately by the secretary, A.P. Mr. Weislogel and ESOL certified teachers Mrs. Ioffe and Ms. Martinez .As a freestanding program, assessments are not given in students' native language. Ells use native language books throughout the school year to assist with comprehension of content. Based on classroom discussion/student feedback, teachers are able to evaluate students' native language development. Paras also maintain ongoing discussions with students in their native language regarding schoolwide issues such as participation in school events, behavior, and attendance issues. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 6a The ESL teachers administer a learning style survey. Based on the results of the survey, the teachers differentiate instruction. They provide more visuals such as graphic organizers, maps, charts, diagrams, kinesthetic activities such as TPR 1  (total physical response), or auditory assignments. ESL teachers utilize bilingual dictionaries and native language books to help students make connections in a cultural and linguistic context. 6b. ELLs with less than three years and who will be taking the state tests are provided with the opportunity to utilize Achieve 3000, a computer based literacy program, which focuses on building vocabulary and reading comprehension through each student's individual reading level. Pre assessments and baseline assessments (ELL Periodic assessments) are administered to identify deficit areas and determine students' instructional goals. Teachers scaffold instruction and provide students strategies to meet their goals. Students work in small groups and are often paired with students sharing similar instructional goals/native language. Teachers assess students through a learning style survey and provide visual, kinesthetic, auditory activities and choices. Students are given bilingual dictionaries and native language books to make connections in a cultural and linguistic context. 6c. ELLs receiving service four to six years utilize Achieve 3000, a computer based literacy program, which focuses on building vocabulary and reading comprehension through each student's individual reading level. Pre assessments and baseline assessments (ELL Periodic assessments) are administered to identify deficit areas and determine students' instructional goals. Teachers also refer to the ELA Exam Item Analysis to identify areas for improvement. Teachers scaffold instruction and provide strategies to help students achieve their goals. Students work in small groups and are often paired with students sharing similar instructional goals/native language. Students are given bilingual dictionaries and native language books to make connections in a cultural and linguistic context. Teachers conference with students in reading,writing, listening, and speaking in order to evaluate deficit area, determine progress, and set next steps. Teachers assess students through a learning style survey and provide visual, kinesthetic, auditory activities and choices. 6d. For long term ELLs, academic intervention is needed. Parents are contacted and a conference is scheduled to discuss students' progress. Parents are made aware to be more involved in their child's education. The A.P and Parent Coordinator informs parents of programs that are available - the 37.5 minute program, afterschool program and Saturday academy. If a student participates in these resources and learning issues continue, his/her name will be submitted to the School Based Support Team for further recommendations. Teachers administer pre-assessments and baseline assessments (ELL Periodic assessments) to identify deficit areas and determine students' instructional goals. Teachers also refer to the ELA Exam Item Analysis to identify areas for improvement. Students work in small groups and are often paired with students who share the same native language and instructional goals. Teachers scaffold instruction and provide next steps to help students achieve their goals. Students are also assessed through a learning style survey and are taught through the various learning modalities - visual, kinesthetic, and auditory. Students utilize Achieve 3000 to build vocabulary and comprehension skills. Students can also utilize bilingual dictionaries/native language books to assist students in making connections in a cultural and linguistic context. 6e. For former ELLs that have tested proficient, teachers continue to serve ESL instruction of 90 minutes per week according to ELL CR part 154.2 and also utilize Achieve 3000 to build vocabulary and comprehension. Teachers focus on making instruction more understandable by speaking clearly, repeating key points, defining key vocabulary in context and using a variety of visual aids such as pictures, charts, graphs and objects. Content teachers review and discuss IEPs of students (if applicable) in order to be informed of the students' special academic needs so they can prepare and plan accordingly. When necessary, instruction is scaffolded (chunking of text, making connections between words and phrases). Teachers administer pre-assessments, baseline assessments (ELL Periodic assessments) and refer to the ELA Exam Item Analysis to identify deficit areas and determine students' instructional goals. Teachers also conference with students in reading,writing, listening, and speaking to evaluate students and provide next steps. Students work in small groups and are paired with others who share similar instructional goals. A learning style survey is administered to students. Based on the results, teachers differentiate instruction to accommodate students' learning styles - visual, kinesthetic, and auditory. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers scaffold instruction by incorporating ESL methodologies and utilizing dual language books and bilingual dictionaries;which can be found and are accessible in our school library. Students are given supplementary materials that align with the CCLS . Use of Smartboard/Visual Aids is a key component. Teachers may often pair students with similar deficit 2  areas/native language. Achieve 3000, a computer based literacy program, aids in targeting students' deficit areas and is utilized in the acceleration of English language development. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Appropriate ELL-SWDs are mainstreamed with General Education students throughout the school day. For example, some ELL-SWDs who are generally proficient in math are placed in general education classes. The Physical Education classes and lunch periods are used to maximize time spent with peers in their respective grades. Students receive push in and stand alone services for ELL. ESL instruction is aligned and modified with students' IEP. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. In the Spring, ESL teachers review NYSESLAT results and analyze the ELL students’ performance score on each modality. This helps identify the interventions necessary to target the specific modalities. ESL teachers collaborate with the content area teachers to target and construct futher multiple points of entry. In grades 6 to 8 at the entering, emerging, transitioning levels; ENL is integrated with ELA. At the expanding level the integrated ENL are placed in the content area that best meets their needs. ELL-SWDs receive ESL instruction through push in services. We provide morning and afternoon block sessions of ESL instruction, as a result we are able to break up the special education population by grade without overloading the ESL class. Teachers also have the data on periodic assessment tests to evaluate the students’ academic needs and provide instruction and strategies to help students reach their learning goals. Students who have been held over will be provided with additional services. ESL teachers keep track of student progress by analyzing the data of the Periodic assessments, classroom tests, literacy and math portfolios as well as their progress report. ESL and classroom teachers will conference on students’ progress using the monthly Reading and Writing Checklists. The Reading Checklist monitors each student’s Fountas and Pinell reading level. The Writing Checklist monitors each student’s growth in mechanics and content. Teachers continuously differentiate instruction and keep track of the students’ progress. Students who receive low performance scores on the writing subtest of the NYSESLAT will be provided with writing interventions. All teachers working with these specific ELL students will focus on practicing note taking and writing a short response after listening to selections in preparation for the state tests. ELL students who did not meet the performance standard in reading will be provided with additional instruction in reading during the school day and Extended Day. Teachers will conference with students and keep notes on the students’ reading behaviors. This will help teachers assess student progress on a weekly basis. In turn, the teachers will focus on reading and test taking strategies, which will prepare the students for state tests. ESL teachers will review their data using the monthly Reading Checklist to monitor students’ growth. For ELL students who did not meet the writing performance standard on the Spring NYSESLAT, the ESL, AIS and classroom teachers will monitor their progress through the writing pieces. These teachers will confer with students and take notes on their writing behaviors and prepare mini lessons to address the students’ academic needs. The teacher will analyze the students’ monthly progress using the Writing Checklist and address students’ writing needs. They will compare their data using the Writing Check list to monitor students’ growth. ELL students’ academic performance in Math, Science and Social Studies is discussed and assessed to further provide intervention during the school day by the ESL, AIS and classroom teachers. ELLs progress in math is monitored through periodic assessments, monthly portfolio pieces, monthly quizzes, and unit assessments. In addition, Science and Social Studies content is differentiated through appropriate reading level material. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 3  This year the focus is on implementing 2 new common core aligned curriculums in ELA and Math: Scholastic Common Core Code X (ELA) and Go Math, TeenBiz, and Vocabulary workshop. Lower level proficiency students are provided with Stand Alone ESL service and also push-in service to content area subjects. More proficient students mostly 7 and 8 graders have 3 hours of Stand Alone service and push-in service to content area subjects. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. In accordance with NCLB policy, the following programs are implemented: Extended Day, after school programs, Saturday academy program, C.H.A.M.P.S athletic program , enrichment program, chess program, afterschool band program , and lego robotics program. Teachers survey ELL students to determine their interests. ELL students are given permission slips in both English and in their Native Language. Paras and Teachers who speak the students' native language call home and make parents aware of programs being offered. ELL subject teachers encourage their students to join the programs that are of interest. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Since ELL students are mainstreamed, they are immersed in Scholastic Common Core Code X ( a rigorous curriculum that is common core aligned). Students utilize Achieve 3000, a computer based literacy program, which identifies deficit areas and provides individual instruction in building comprehension and vocabulary. All classrooms are equipped with Smartboards and laptops to support students' visual, auditory, or kinesthetic learning styles. Students have access to native language books and bilingual dictionaries. An example of support is by providing push in ESL services, tutoring, and after school programs.Teachers scaffold instruction by incorporating ESL methodologies and utilizing dual language books and bilingual dictionaries;which can be found and are accessible in our school library. Students are given supplementary materials that align with the CCLS . Use of Smartboard/Visual Aids is a key component. Teachers may often pair students with similar deficit areas/native language. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The ESL program model is in place . ELL Teachers provide the students with native language support during class through the use of bilingual dictionaries and books in native languages. When possible, students are grouped with others who share the same native language. By doing so, teachers assist students in building vocabulary/comprehension and guide students to make connections in English. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Resources are age and grade level appropriate. Achieve 3000, a computer based literacy program, initially assesses Ell students' individual reading and proficiency levels. Stadlier-Oxford Vocabulary Workshop, a computer based vocabulary enrichment program is used to strenghten individual deficits. Then, the program customizes specific instructional activities paired with grade appropriate comprehension passages for each student's individual reading level. The goal of the program is to develop vocabulary and comprehension skills allowing students to progress in reading levels by the end of the school year. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Since ELL students are mainstreamed, they are immersed in Scholastic Common Core Code X ( a rigorous curriculum that is common core aligned). Students utilize Achieve 3000, a computer based literacy program, which identifies deficit areas and provides individual instruction in building comprehension and vocabulary. All classrooms are equipped with Smartboards and laptops to support students' visual, auditory, or kinesthetic learning styles. Students have access to native language books and bilingual dictionaries. An example of support is by providing push in ESL services, tutoring, and after school 4  programs.Teachers scaffold instruction by incorporating ESL methodologies and utilizing dual language books and bilingual dictionaries;which can be found and are accessible in our school library. Students are given supplementary materials that align with the CCLS . Use of Smartboard/Visual Aids is a key component. Teachers may often pair students with similar deficit areas/native language. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before parents register their children, they are given an overview of programs offered. An orientation is provided in English and translation services are facilitated using bilingual teachers, guidance counselors , para professional, and Google Translate. Ells who enrolled throughout the school year are tested with NYSITELL and provided with ESL service according to the level of English proficiency. Ells also provided with Stand Alone and content area subjects/push-in ESL service. School counselor service is also available for them. These students have the access to Achieve 3000 and Stadlier-Oxford Vocabulary Workshop. ELLs are involved in all fairs like Social Studies, Science, and Language. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer language electives to our ELLs 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. The following personnel are involved in receiving professional development in ESL methodology within the school year, Assistant Principals, subject area teachers, Paraprofessionals, ESL Teachers, Special Education Teachers, Speech Therapists. ELL teachers are provided with professional development through the OELL as needed. They also meet monthly, or as necessary, with their Assistant Principal, who supervises the ESL program. During this time ESL teachers provide training in instructional strategies for their ELL population. Teachers also look at data to discuss student intervention, progress and goals . Secretaries are also providedwith the workshop on ELLs enrollment. 2.Monthly department meetings focus on training teachers in instructional tools (e.g. using computers to access individualized programs such as Achieve 3000), analyzing data from various sources (e.g. interim assessments, NYSESLAT results, NYS ELA and Math results, teacher observations); Teachers attend NYCDOE sponsored workshops relating to ELL instruction (i.e. Teaching Approaches for ELLs); Teachers of ELL students who deliver content area instruction(Sci., Math, SS, ELA) attend Interdisciplinary PD meetings with their subject specific colleagues and ESL teachers make sure that their colleagues are aware of all requirements for ELLs... During department meetings, teachers also meet in team to discuss trends in data, identify 5  deficit areas, discuss scaffolding/ instructional strategies, and collaborate to design lessons and assessments that are Common Core aligned. Teachers use Scholastic Common Core Code X as a guide. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 3. Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, and ESL teachers receive professional development on strategies on how to provide ELLs support as they transition from elementary to middle and/or middle to high school. ESL teachers are provided with opportunities to visit their colleages and discuss the matters with the Principal, Assistant Principal(s) and Guidance Counselors. Parents also attend ELL orientation meetings, grade meetings for parents (i.e. promotional / academic requirements) and parental workshops (i.e. Planning Meetings with teachers for upcoming Science/ Social Studies Fairs). Parental workshops have also included informational workshops regarding parental use of Pupil Pass to access student data . 4. Non-ESL general education teachers receive 7.5 hours, non ESL special education teachers receive 10 hours. The training takes place during staff professional development. A certified ESL teacher conducts workshops that demonstrate how to implement ESL methodologies (such as Total Physical Response) in teaching. The ESL teacher scaffolds instruction for teachers in their subject area. Once the workshop is conducted, the A.P records attendance. An agenda and minutes of the meeting is distributed and placed in the teacher's file. Teachers are also given the opportunity to attend OELL and TESOL conferences for professional development Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ELL workshops, Parent-conferences, and Professional Development are provided throughout the school year .Parents and ELLs are provided with translation services throuhout the year b ybilingual teachers and para professionals, and Google Translate service. All letters and documents are provided in parents/students native language as well as English. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. A monthly newsletter is sent to parents notifying them of current and ongoing programs and activities: Participation in PTA activities, School fund Raisers, Auctions, and school wide events. Parents are also present on the School Leadership Committee. Each grade A.P conducts an orientation meeting for parents to inform them on the upcoming school year. Parents participate in the Saturday ELL Academy Puppetry in Motion which is provided by Brooklyn College. Parent workshops are held throughout the school year on numerous topics- ELA and Math State Tests, Parent Teacher Conferences and the need for parental volunteers in various school fairs - Multi cultural fair, Foreign Language Fair, and Shakespeare Festival. All events have paras who provide translation services. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 6  7 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Robert Ciulla, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 8  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Dyker Heights Intermediate School DBN: 20K201 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Robert Ciulla Title Principal Robert Weislogel Assistant Principal Margo Kelly Parent Coordinator Anna Ioffe/Myrna Martinez ENL/Bilingual Teacher J. Parent Teacher/Subject Area P. Stansis/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Veena Veeramah Ms. Costantino Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 7/2/15 7/2/15 7/2/15 7/2/15 1/1/01 7/2/15 7/2/15 7/2/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 7/2/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 9  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 20k201 School Name: I.S.201 Superintendent: Ms. The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this Natalya Markovich ENL Facilitator n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No YES n/a n/a n/a YES n/a n/a n/a * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. I.s 201 utilizes the Home Language Survey Form, Ethnic Form and oral interviews in the parents' native language to ensure parents are provided with appropriate and timely information in a language they can understand. After parents complete the Home Language Identification Survey and Ethnic Survey, the information is recorded on ATS by the Pupil Accounting Secretary. The ESL teachers review the HLIS and interview the parents. Copies of the HLIS forms are kept on file in the Assitant Principal's office and the originals are placed in the students' cumultive record cards together with the Parent Survey/Program Selection form. The RELC (ATS) Report is also utilized to identify home language. 0  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ALBANIAN ARABIC BENGALI CHAM CHINESE ANY CANTONESE FRENCH GREEK HUNGARIAN ITALIAN KOREAN MOLDAVIAN MANDARIN ENGLISH POLISH RUSSIAN SLOVAK SPANISH THAI URDU UKRAINIAN VIETNAMESE 7 94 20 2 955 0 1 4 4 5 2 2 0 1087 3 33 0 229 1 6 1 1 0.28 3.83 0.81 0.08 38.87 0 0.04 0.16 0.16 0.2 0.08 0.08 0 44.24 0.12 1.34 0 9.32 0.04 0.24 0.04 0.04 6 93 19 3 698 78 1 4 4 5 1 3 204 1058 7 32 1 231 1 6 1 1 0.24 3.79 0.77 0.12 28.41 3.17 0.04 0.16 0.16 0.2 0.04 0.12 8.3 43.06 0.28 1.3 0.04 9.4 0.04 0.24 0.04 0.04 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Non-applicable Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 1  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families The following documents are disseminated to families throughout the school year. Emergency blue cards, lunch forms, behavioral contracts, grading policies, documentation on how to find translation services on e-chalk, grade orientation meetings, agendas, discipline code, NYS testing dates, High School information-directories, weekly and monthly events, after-school program information, report cards, parent-teacher conference notifications, and notification of upcoming parent workshops. 9/7-ongoing 9/7-ongoing 9/7 9/7 How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Blue cards are translated in languages Lunch forms are distributed in home languages Behavioral contracts - translation unit grading policies- translation unit/ in-house 9/7-ongoing Our translation coordinator receives the documentation's from our school officials in a timely fashion which enable the documents to be translated and sent out to families when needed. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide 9/22- ongoing Meet and Greet and Grade orientations in September. Curriculum night, High School Information Night, Parent workshop on "How-to" for fair projects, and ELL Orientation for parents in October. Parent-Teacher conferences in the November, March, and May. Parent workshops, parent conferences, monthly PTA meetings, Fairs, concerts, and school play will be interpretation service(s)? We hire the interpretation unit to come to the building to translate. We also use the translation hotline. We also have staff members that are bilingual. 2  provided throughout the course of the school year. Guidance Counselors, Assistant Principals, and School based support team will have ongoing interactions with the parents via emails, meetings, and phone-calls n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. utilize the translation hotline unit. We also have school messenger that sends out messages based upon their home language that is indicated on ATS. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. This is discussed at the first staff meeting in September. The staff also receives an email of the regulation in which they have to reply to that they have read the document. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Dyker Heights Intermediate School 201 will use faculty, parent coordinator, parent volunteers and outside contractors as needed. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent Survey, SLT meetings, PTA meetings, Parent-Teacher conferences, and Guidance Meetings will be used to gain feedback from parents to support their translation needs. 3  4 
