 22K203 School Name: P.S. 203 THE SCHOOL FOR FUTURE LEADERS Principal: YOCASTA DOMINGUEZMILLER   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Elementary 332200010203 Pre-K-5 School Number (DBN): 22K203 5101 Avenue M, Brooklyn, New York 11234 718-241-8488 Phone Number: 718-209-9641 Fax: YocastaMiller Ydoming@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 22 Email Address: YocastaMiller Penny Berman Rena Mussington Nicole Berrios DarlineJoseph N/A N/A N/A District Information Ms. Julia Bove Superintendent: 5619 Flatlands Avenue, Brooklyn, New York 11234 Superintendent’s Office Address: jbove@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-968-6115 Phone Number: 718-968-6252 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn South Team #5 FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Mauriciere De govia Executive Director: 415 89 th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11209 MDegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 759-4862 Phone Number: 718-759-3909 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) YocastaMiller Penny Berman Rena Mussington Nicole Berrios Danielle Pavony Donna Baughman-Perry *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Melissa Gomes Scherriean Rodney Kellie Nicole Graves Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? We are dedicated to having all of our students achieve high academic standards and raising the level of academic rigor and accountability for our entire school community. Through high quality standards-based instruction, within the setting of a nurturing environment, all of our students will develop social, civic and technological skills to create a community of life long learners.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. At P.S. 203 we are constantly looking for ways to obtain the most complete picture of student performance we can to inform our instruction. This is done while also devoting great effort to establishing an environment where quality instruction will take place for all students. P.S. 203 is fortunate to be a culturally diverse and proud learning environment where our student body make-up consists of over twelve ethnicities and languages. Parents feel welcomed knowing that we provide translation services for all ENL families and trust is earned through our culminating Multicultural Celebration; we love our parents and ensure their happiness by cementing strong family and community ties. In addition, we provide a full calendar of parent workshops and events, many of which are in conjunction with our high functioning PTA, on a myriad of academic and social topics of value to the families. Our school’s Academic Pledge: “We all can learn. We own our learning. We are expected to exercise our minds,” serves as a constant reinforcement of our school’s desire to have all learners (student and adult) continue to challenge themselves as active learners, responsible for their academic growth. P.S. 203 has re-imagined its Social-Emotional programming to further support its students. We have re-established the Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports (PBIS) Team with which to strategically use OORS data to aid students who consistently exhibit behavior that is not aligned to the Citywide Behavioral Expectations and Discipline Code. To cultivate strong classroom relationships between all students, P.S. 203 is including the works of Sanford Harmony. It is anticipated that students will feel safe and supported, where academics is their number one priority. Our school’s involvement with PBIS has aided us in our desire to create an environment where instruction is productive. Our SOAR program ( S how self-control; O n Task; A ct kindly and follow directions; R esponsible and respectful) is the visual enactment of PBIS and Character Education. It is a way for the school community to improve the environment of the larger spaces within our building. Our students are receptive to the benefits of making positive choices, and that has impacted on tone and student achievement. Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classes are identical in rigor and expectation to every other general education class on the grade. There is equal access to all programs and activities. Our ENL students also receive additional support during and after school via our Title III programming. Parents of students with special needs are invited to tour the classrooms on the grades whenever they are considering an evaluation for their child so their decisions can be informed within the realm of having seen “real” classrooms. Our small classes (12:1:1) also follow the same curriculum as the classes on the grades with the appropriate modifications in place. Participation and access to all school functions are extended equally across the school. In an effort to support classroom teachers, P.S. 203 empowered two teachers to become instructional support specialists, one in math and one in literacy. Those teachers will teach their homeroom class for half the school day and spend the other half pushing into classrooms to model lessons, provide feedback on a teacher's teaching, host professional learning opportunities for upper and lower grade teachers, etc. P.S. 203 understands that if our teachers are immersed in hands on, purposeful professional development student achievement can be maximized. The ELA instructional support specialist will focus on Guided Reading and the Math instructional support specialist will focus on uniting all grades through Major cluster areas and the New York State Common Core State Standards. In addition, teachers will have access to attend meaningful professional learning opportunities with Teacher's College programming (CPET). 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. P.S. 203 supports SWD's on a regular basis in and out of the classroom. Specifically we have determined that our SWD's need more access to materials on grade level which they can access at home, for example, through the i-Ready program. P.S. 203 recognizes that there is a growing population of ENL students in need of greater support with vocabulary instruction and deeper immersion in the English language to build conversation skills. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 0  During the 2017-2018 school year, the staff of P.S. 203 has worked diligently to reflect and utilize the feedback found from observations conducted with the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Administrative feedback articulated clear expectations for teacher practice and supported teacher development, all within a proactive climate and a culture of respect and continuous improvement (Collaborative Teachers.) Through accurate, timely, and actionable feedback, classroom observations have provided teachers with the necessary steps to raise the level of expectations for all. The administrative staff lead by example and nurtured the professional growth of teachers and staff delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement (Effective School Leadership.) P.S. 203 will again review our practices in order to support teachers as they gain confidence in their content base to plan lessons which rely less on teacher manuals and more on meeting the individual needs of students in differentiated, engaging ways utilizing authentic texts and technological resources. P.S. 203 has made progress during the 2017-2018 school year in aligning teaching practices to the curricula and beginning to reflect a set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the Danielson Framework for Teaching and the instructional shifts. However, instruction in the classroom is inconsistent and is not coherent across grades (Rigorous Instruction.) P.S. 203 will customize our units of study in Reading, Writing, and Math to ensure vertical and horizontal alignment, utilizing our new instructional support staff members. Through consult with administration and their vision, these support staff members will strengthen the professional development offered to all staff members to ensure best practices of scaffolding and assessment are shared and put into practice. Further, teachers' content knowledge will be strengthened with the support of the District 22 Ambassadors and the creation of dynamic model classrooms. Our Instructional Focus supports teacher growth in Assessment: Teachers will provide valuable feedback, which is timely, constructive, and substantive and must provide students the guidance they need to improve their performance. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 22K203 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 729 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 82 78 29 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 1 N/A 29 29 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 64.0% % Attendance Rate 62.0% % Reduced Lunch 8.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 10.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.09 0% 9% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 38.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 84% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 89 87 29 93.8% 0.8% 19.5% 76.5% 7.0% 2.7% 2 0% 6.9 41.7% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As evidenced by formal and informal literacy observations (MOTP), and in conjunction with the 2018 June Instructional report, many students are not actually reading during reading workshop time. One reason for this may be that students are not matched to texts that they can read with accuracy, fluency, and deep comprehension. Time spent reading books is crucial to developing strong readers, and readers who are reading too-hard texts are not accumulating the reading volume that they need. In addition, when teachers confer and assess readers who are not matched to text, they are unable to determine appropriate next steps in teaching or glean accurate data to inform instruction. Our school’s strengths include teachers who are committed to the success and improvement of their classroom and school, which promotes high expectations and actively engaged students. There is a strong need to maintain and strengthen our school’s academic program. Continued implementation of the following activities will address the school’s needs: collaboration of teacher teams, progress monitoring of all students, flexible instructional groups, and rubrics to provide clear expectations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will utilize i-Ready in order to support every reader with targeted instruction to increase student's literacy abilities, so that there will be a reduction of 5 % in the number of Tier 3 students (at risk, 2 or more levels below) and an increase of 5% in the number of Tier 1 students (on or above level) as measured by the results of the Fall and June diagnostic. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Implementation of i-Ready K-5; 45 minutes per week in class, unlimited time at home. Parents and Guardians informed of their child’s passwords. i-Ready is designed to support ELA and Mathematical progress despite ENL, Spec. Ed., or gifted and talented status. Four sessions, quarterly, of hands on Professional Development by representatives of i-Ready. First diagnostic exam (Fall) in ELA and Math taken by all students First round of growth monitoring exams conducted. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Entire Sept 2018 School Entire School Grades 1-5 Administration Teachers Instructional Cabinet Instructional Cabinet Dec. 2018 Grades 1-5 Jan. 2019 Administration and Teachers Feb. 2019 Jun. 2019 4  ENL vertical team created to support teachers and i-Ready First Round of Diagnostic for grades K and 1; Second round for grades 2-5. i-Ready workshop for parents and families Entire School Sept 2018 Administration and Teachers PD Team November 2018 January 2019 SLT, Administration, Teachers March 2019 Administration and Teachers Teachers, Parents, and Administration Administration, Ambassadors and Lead Teachers May 2019 Sept 2018 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P.S. 203 recognizes that it is our responsibility to inform the parents the manner in which we educate their child/children so they are better informed how to support their child/children at home. Workshops will be provided by our ELA and Math Ambassadors, our instructional support staff, and the Parent Coordinator. Parents will be provided hands-on, technology based, learning opportunities where they can learn along-side their child, and leave 5  with concrete next steps. A schedule of events for the year, based on feedback from our parents, will be provided by our teachers and complied by the Parent Coordinator, will detail the weekly family engagement time. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : School-based staff, ELA and Math Ambassadors, Administration Instructional Resources : i-Ready Schedule adjustment: opportunities during the school day for online access I-Ready, Professional Learning time on Monday afternoons, evening parent/family workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Quarterly Diagnostics will be reviewed; winter diagnostic will serve as the mid-point benchmark. Staff and administration will use the data from this diagnostic, as well as other i-Ready data sources, to determine progress made by each student. This will provide administrators with information regarding students’ literacy and mathematical progress. Teachers will once again be part of inquiry teams (horizontal and vertical) designed to support their use of i-Ready data to drive instruction for all students. Teachers will inform the administration should any child not make adequate progress within benchmark dates. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) i-Ready quarterly diagnostics and monthly diagnostic exams will be used to assess student progress with meeting the ELA and Math goals. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? P.S. 203 has always prided itself on ensuring that all students are in an academic setting where they feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. This, too, includes moving children into the least restrictive environment which allows those children to thrive. During the 2017-2018 school year, P.S. 203 was able to move all ten of the children who amass the preponderance of the level three and four infractions into least restrictive environments, including students decertified from IEP services. After a close read of the 2017-2018 OORS reports and the February Mid-point running records review, it was evident to the SLT, SIT, and administration that for the 2018-2019 school year our target population to support are those children who incurred level 3 and 4 infractions and those who are not making adequate reading progress. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a reduction of 5% in the number of level three and four infractions as measured by the Chancellor's Discipline Code. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Identify students with Level 3 and 4 infractions entered into OORS during the 2017-2018 school year to include them in counseling intervention groups and in a short term social emotional residency (Check-In/Check-Out) where feasible. Targeted students from 2017-2018 OORS data Students will take part in Restorative Justice, ReThink pilot and/ or Culturally responsive teaching practices. The PBIS Team will ensure all constituencies in the building (Guidance, SAPIS, SAT Team) will be updated by PBIS facilitator as to incentives, implementation of SOAR program, and participate in ongoing dialogue. Where available, DOE trained staff will assist with the implementation of our predetermined systems and structures: Check-in/Check out, SOARport store in use, Green/Gold Tickets, SOAR dances, parent tickets (white.) Initiate and conduct class lessons on social emotional learning topics with follow-up/ reinforcement by classroom teachers and other support personnel. Provide adult workshops on social emotional topics for self and family application as based on survey results and data compiled by P.S. 203 PBIS facilitator. Blue tickets will be distributed to families who attend so that they can be redeemed at the SOARport store by the children. Administration, Content Specialist, SAVE room teacher, Guidance staff, , Pupil Personnel Team members supervisors Sept. 2018; and ongoing Sept.-Oct. 2018 Sept. 2018 and ongoing All students Sept. 2018 and ongoing Parents/ Guardians Sept., Nov., March, and May PTC 's SAVE room teacher, Content specialists, classroom teachers, TCIS consultants Administration, Content specialist, SAVE room teacher, Guidance staff, Substance Abuse Prevention Intervention Services, consultants families 8  Provide families and staff with online resources (and needed training to access the resources) to support social emotional learning at school and at home. the following professional learning opportunities have been planned: The Middle School Transition; Respect For All; Home and School Communication. Parents will be given a calendar of PBIS themes so parents will reinforce what they have learned to what is expected from children at school. Provide opportunities for teachers to attend Autism PD School community School community FBA/BIP Training School community Monthly PTA meetings Tuesday Parent Engagement Sessions Sept. 2017-June 2018 October 2017-June 2018 November 2017-June 2018 September 2017- June 2018 Administration, Content specialist, SAVE room teacher, Guidance staff, classroom teachers, consultants families Opportunities to certify staff members in TCIS Paraprofessionals Professional Learning Opportunities for all paraprofessionals 9  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. P.S. 203 recognizes that it is our responsibility to inform the parents the manner in which we create a safe and supportive learning environment in order to support their children at home. The Parent Coordinator will devise a series of workshops based from evidence gleaned from the Parent Coordinator's Survey and the Learning Environment Surveys (Green Surveys) beginning with the first PTC in September. Administration will provide support to the Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: School staff including teachers, paraprofessionals, PBIS facilitator , Guidance staff, School Assessment Team, SAVE teacher and Administration. Instructional resources : NYCDOE OORS data entry system, Learning Environment Surveys, Restorative Justice and Culturally Responsive approaches Scheduling adjustments : Classroom, individual, small group sessions, possible after school programming for student/family sessions, Professional Learning schedules for staff and Pupil Personnel Team, grade assemblies. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The percentages of infractions in OORS for targeted students and classrooms will be compared to the 2017-2018 data to determine if progress is being made towards meeting that goal, with a mid-point benchmark in February by SAVE room teacher. The results of that monitoring will be shared with school staff. Data from Check-in/Check out will also be presented. PBIS self- assessment survey will be provided to the staff community and compared to the initial survey provided at the end of the 2018 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 0  The percentages of infractions entered in OORS for targeted students will be compared to the 2017-2018 data to determine if there has been a 5% decrease in the number of level three and four infractions as measured by the Chancellor's Discipline Code. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on Advance data (ratings on administrative formal and informal observations) from the 2017 - 2018 school year, teachers require support in the elements of component 1e Designing Coherent Instruction from the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Currently 15% of our teachers were rated Developing in component 1e. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers on teacher teams will collaborate on revising current Teacher's College, and Go math! lesson and unit plans resulting in an increase of 5% increase in teacher Final MOTP scores for component 1e. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration, Ambassadors, Instructional Support Specialists, Classroom Teachers.  Teachers will revise and adjust unit maps in reading, writing, and math with which to focus on assessments, questioning, and peer review. K-2, 3-5 bands June 2018-June 2019  Unit maps in ELA will contain essential questions, CCLS, overview of the parts/bends of the unit, mentor texts, and charts. The sections on supporting ENL students below and above grade level will be completed during the 2018-2019 school year, prior to the unit.  Unit maps in Math contain the big ideas of the unit, K-2, 3-5 bands mathematical models, and strategies. They also contain a section on differentiation and supporting ENL students. These sections can continue to be improved and added to throughout the 2018-2019 school year.  As part of their professional responsibilities teachers will develop supports for ENLs and students below and above grade level. K-2, 3-5 bands K-2, 3-5 bands Teachers, paras, students Disseminate and sustain an instructional focus to improve the quality of assessment practices in all subject areas, including SWD's and ENL's, aligned to Danielson component 1e. Review collected lesson plans from formal and informal observations to ensure expectations of component 1e are evident as it applies to student mastery of content. All teachers K-5 Sept 2018 IPC meetings; ongoing 3 Sept. 2018 Administration, Ambassadors, Instructional Support Specialists, Classroom Teachers. Administration, Ambassadors, Instructional Conduct item analysis of BOY Measure Of Student Learning in ELA and Math, Baseline in Math, Benchmark assessments in ELA and Math, and Tasks created by Ambassadors and Instructional Support Specialists to identify student trends with which to inform planning and student grouping. Classroom teachers Grades 3-5 Sept. 2018- Dec. 2018 Support Specialists, Classroom Teachers. Administration, Ambassadors, Instructional Support Specialists, Classroom Teachers. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P.S. 203 recognizes that it is our responsibility to inform parents the manner in which we assess and create action plans for their child(ren)'s growth through the CCLS. This, too, creates transparency between the home and school and establishes the purpose of the new instructional focus. The Ambassadors and the Instructional Support Specialists will devise a series of workshops designed to review the expectations of the CCLS and the manner in which students will be held accountable in the classroom. These workshops will include informing/teaching parents to hold genuine discussions with their children, the manner in which great questions are formed, and how to read a rubric. Administration will provide support to the Ambassadors and new Instructional Support Specialists. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Monday afternoon PD sessions (1-2x month)  Ensuring that classroom materials align with the curriculum maps.  Time within the schedule to allow for teacher collaboration as well as common planning time.  Substitute teachers to cover teachers for related Professional Development via Ambassadors and Instructional Support Specialists.  Teacher per session and per diem; Supervisor per session  Technology; Smartboards, Promethian boards, laptops, desk top computers  Math manipulatives  Guided Reading Materials  Amplify Science  Re think pilot, Restorative Circles training, Culturally Responsive teaching Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A schedule of observation has been created. We can determine from those results if improvement on 1e is evident by the increase in the overall number of Effectives and Highly Effectives. Our midpoint benchmark will occur in February 4  which consists of utilizing MOTP Progress Report on the Advance Web Application. Further, bi-weekly meetings with Ambassadors and Instructional Support Specialists and their findings will occur. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The leading indicator of growth in component 1e will be the MOTP Progress Report on the Advance Web Application. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Administration at P.S. 203 has always nurtured and supported the professional growth of its teachers and staff. To improve upon already effective practices, the Administration will focus on professional learning opportunities around Math content and aligning their lessons throughout the CCLS The Administration at P.S. 203 will focus on ensuring the Math CCLS drives lesson planning, unit planning, and quality assessments. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will be a 3-5% increase in levels 3-4 as measured by the state math exam in grades 3, 4, and 5. This increase will include students with disabilities and ENL's. Progress will be monitored by the analysis of mastery of individual grade specific math standards. The 2018 data indicated a 10 % percent increase in levels 3 and 4. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Ambassadors and new Instructional Support Specialists will support staff members in revising our unit plans to include supplemental materials , ensuring differentiation of instruction to support all students, including SWD's and ENL's. Classroom Teachers and paras Build the capacity of our Professional Development Team, Math Ambassador, and and new Instructional Support Specialists to coordinate professional learning opportunities based on students data (formative and summative assessments.) Weekly Cabinet meetings will ensure implementation of specific learning opportunities. Classroom Teachers and paras The ENL teacher will push in to the classroom to support Math lesson planning and teaching of ENL students. Cycles of Observations will take place to ensure ENL students are making adequate yearly progress as measured by the CCSS. ENL Students and Classroom Teachers Sept. 2018 Administration, Ambassadors, Instructional Support Specialists, Classroom Teachers, PD Team Sept. 2018 and ongoing through Teacher Team meetings Administration, Ambassadors, Instructional Support Specialists, Classroom Teachers, PD Team Sept. 2018 ENL Teacher, Classroom teachers, Administration Administration, Ambassadors, Instructional Support Specialists, Classroom Teachers, PD Team Professional development on Major math clusters as well as math standards. i-Ready training for all teachers. Progress monitoring will occur via the i-Ready progress reports Administer a mid-term state math assessment. Identify the implications of our work. What is going well and what are our next steps? Classroom Teachers October 2017- On going Sept. 2018 and ongoing Classroom Teachers January 2019- Ongoing Classroom Teachers Administering and analyzing math performance task October 2018- Ongoing 7  Culturally Responsive teaching to help address the needs of our culturally and linguistically diverse learners. Classroom Teachers Math Ambassador 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P.S. 203 recognizes that it is our responsibility to inform parents the manner in which we prepare students to meet and exceed the standards as per the New York State Math Exam. Parents will be provided with a series of Math Workshops, designed to support their understanding of the standard curriculum (GoMath!), Common Core State Standards as appropriate for their child, and contain support for SWD's and ENL's. The Administration will provide support to the Ambassadors and new Instructional Support Specialists, in addition to the parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : The following specific staff will be the core support for growth: Teachers, Administration, Math Ambassador, and new Instructional Support Specialists. Teachers and Supervisors will be paid per session to work with parents and families on math related topics. The prep schedule affords classroom teachers time with the Math Ambassador and new Instructional Support Specialists through common planning time. Common Core aligned materials will be reviewed and purchased as needed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will meet with Administration to review data which is directly linked to the CCLS which will be able to predict progress towards achieving our goal in February. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Administrative staff will review CCLS aligned data sources (monthly assessments, anecdotes from lessons, etc.) with Ambassadors and new Instructional Support Specialists from the classroom teachers in testing grades to determine trends, provide feedback, and inform PD decisions. Major and minor cluster areas as determined by New York State will be used to determine if students have made progress with or have met the CCLS. 8  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P.S. 203 has always relied on the kindness of its local Congressmen and Congresswomen, Assemblymen and Assemblywoman, Councilmen and Councilwomen, local business owners, and the families they service. It is with great pride that P.S. 203 utilizes their services in a myriad of ways to enhance our school community in the form of donations to improve the technology in our school, refurbish crumbling bathrooms and classrooms, and replace worn books in our library. As reflected in prior years’ School Leadership Team minutes, increasing parental involvement, as measured by sign in sheets at each event, has been an ongoing area of concern. As a result, past SLTs and Parent Teachers Association have continually sought to enhance the offerings that appeal to our overall parent body. They have been attentive and successful in doing so, but there is still a need for improvement. While we celebrate the large, enthusiastic, positive attendance at conferences, shows, assemblies, and school yard events, the typical attendance at PTA meetings and most workshops average only 2-3% of our parent body at each event. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase of 10% parent involvement at events as measured by attendance sheets from the previous year's calendar events. Our goal this year will be to honor the different families in our community by incorporating as many cultures and celebrations as possible. These calendar events will include, celebrations from different cultures, Parent Teacher Association meetings, Parent workshops, and Parent Survey drives. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Provide an electronic copy of the calendar of events to pre existing email addresses as per the supplied Blue Cards on file and the Parent Coordinator database. All parents and guardians Sept. 2018 and ongoing monthly Parent Coordinator, PTA, school staff Utilize School Messenger to employ multiple approaches to parental outreach. Providing a monthly school newsletter which serves as a written reminder of the calendar of events. All parents and guardians Sept. 2018 and ongoing monthly Parent Coordinator, PTA, school staff Have celebrations which represent the different cultures of the school community through out the year. Conduct needs assessment via family and staff surveys to determine what offerings adults within the school community are seeking that would result in increased participation/involvement at school All parents and guardians Broaden the offerings of family workshops to add several academic family workshops. All parents and guardians Coordinate school events with PTA meetings to increase attendance. September 2018-June 2019 every three months November 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, PTA, school staff Parent Coordinator, PTA, school staff Schedule teacher facilitated workshops and provide a schedule for the school year. 1  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. P.S. 203 has long been fortunate to have the support of Alan Maisel Councilmen, Jaime Wiillams, Assemblywoman, Eric Adams, Borough President, and Craig Williams, Borough Safety Director to support family and community engagement. In addition, Millennium Development and the Bergen Beach Youth Organization houses its program here, where over three-hundred children partake in their yearly activities. Our extremely active Student Government performs in senior citizen homes, works with our local church food pantry by collecting and serving food to those in need. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources : School staff, PTA, NYPD, representatives of local businesses and local government. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By mid February, we will review evidence of sign in sheets as to whether or not we are approaching our goal, as a mid point benchmark. This mid-point benchmark will ensure we are growing each event by 2% of parents attending our events. Since our parent offerings are throughout the year, we will continuously monitor based on the individual event. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. After each parent event we will review the sign in sheets to assess our progress. Our Parent Coordinator and the PTA will conduct significant family outreach via social media (e.g. Newsletters, Surveys, Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Parent Express, e-mail, text messaging, etc.). It is anticipated that this, coupled with an action plan, will yield a desired increase in participation and attendance, creating a stronger connection between home and school. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All students performing in Levels 1 and 2 on corresponding Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark assessments and/or NYS ELA score Mathematics All students performing in Levels 1 and 2 on corresponding Go Math! pre-Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Within the classrooms, Academic Intervention Services is provided to targeted students through the use of flexible guided reading groups, , centers Audio books, S.P.I.R.E. program, and Wilson as well as teacher created materials; students work with teachers, peers and individually to develop and explain, both verbally and in written form, their thinking about reading . Targeted students in the lowest third of Grades 3-5 will receive Tier 1 and Tier 2 support from the classroom teacher, daily. Within the classrooms Academic Intervention Services is provided to targeted students through the use of grade specific New Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) In-class Academic Intervention Services is provided small group or 1:1. During the school day. In-class Academic Intervention Services is provided small group or 1:1. During the school day. 3  assessments and/or NYS Math scores Science Social Studies Students not meeting Level 3 criteria on the Grade 4 ELSE 2018 receive small group and individual intervention from their classroom teacher, and Science cluster teacher, where applicable. The prep schedule is created to accommodatetwo periods per week via the science specialist to support fourth grade Common Core expectations. Students are selected based on teacher identified need. In-class Academic Intervention Services is provided small group or 1:1. During the school day. In-class Academic Intervention Services is provided small group or 1:1. During the school day. York State mathematics books, Go Math!, flexible small groups, and centers. These may be executed with the use of teacher created materials; students in all grades explore various mathematical topics. Students work with teachers and peers to explain verbally and in written form their thinking as it relates to understanding and solving math problems. Academic Intervention Services in science is provided on an on-going basis during instructional time. Students not meeting the promotional criteria in science receive small group and individual intervention from their classroom teacher, and Science cluster teacher, where applicable. Utilization of Amplify Science to differentiate. Teacher made assessments, materials contained in the Expeditionary Learning Units of Study, and brand new Passport materials and assessments; students will begrouped for 4 In-class Academic Intervention Services is provided small group or 1:1 These services are provided during the day. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students are selected based on identified need, mandates from theIEP, and at-risk behaviors. differentiated support. Guidance services are provided in various forms for those students who require mandated services and those who are deemedat-risk. These services are provided by two (2) guidance counselors. Students requiring Tier 2 intervention will be involved in fluid restorative circles led by our SAVE room teacher. Our school psychologist services students on an at risk basis only as needs arise and not for any extended length of time. Our school social worker offers educationally related support services (ERSS) to general education students in Grades K-5 to assist them in overcoming academic, social, or emotional difficulties. This intervention aids students in resolving issues so they can improve academically and socially. Students who have asthma receive individual and small group sessions 1-3 5  times a year with our school nurse. 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 1. 8 STH students are currently enrolled in P.S. 203. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The Pupil Personal secretary will make periodic checks in ATS to ensure housing status has been entered according to what the parent checks on the Residency Form and if this category is missing an indication of residence status. The school will ensure that all STH's will have adequate school supplies, materials, and opportunities at the school to be successful, including opportunity to partake in field trips and activities which may incur an expense, from Title 1 Set-Aside funds. If necessary, summer reading books will be purchased or lent from the library to reduce a summer slump. In Dec. 2017 we partnered with the United Federation of Teachers and had a holiday celebration with the STH population of our school. Children enjoyed a pizza party, gifts and party bags. We are looking forward to making this an annual event if need continues to exist. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Once a position is opened, the administration attends hiring fairs, obtains resumes, and screens them. Once candidates have been identified as possible hires, the administration invites them to come in for a one on one discussion and demo lesson in the respective grade band they may be teaching. When a teacher is first hired at P.S. 203, they are placed in a class based on the posted opening. All new teachers receive ongoing mentoring that exceeds the contractual mandate. Subsequent to this a teacher is given a preference sheet with which to request three preference grades to teach. Based on this, and their strengths, a teacher is placed accordingly. We strive to provide professional learning opportunities to ensure teachers are building their content base, which in turn, supports teachers as they pass their content specialty tests, state certification exams, etc., which aides in their retention. Since professional learning opportunities are differentiated by topic, this choice supports teachers and compliments the areas which need improvement. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Teachers meet in grade teams to generate grade-specific comprehension focuses for reading instruction based on the needs they were noting among students. They align that instruction with the Common Core Learning Standards. Also at these meetings, teacher and paraprofessionals determine how professional development will support their focus. ● Members of the Professional Development Team determine which learning opportunities will populate the Monday calendars. The team will decide which staff members will host each PD, since many staff attend PD's out of the building. It is the charge of grade teams and vertical teams to use and determine if the strategies given ensure impact in the classrooms, thus the foundation of inquiry work. These decisions are based on data, surveys and conversations with constituents and the principal. 9  ● Teachers and supervisors track students’ progress on benchmarks, and academic assessments to evaluate the effectiveness of the strategies/activities and determine whether additional supports are necessary. ● Teachers in Grades 3-5 meet in grade and cross-grade teams to analyze data for trends to generate grade-specific focuses for instruction based on the needs they noted among students. They align that instruction with the Common Core Learning Standards. ● Teachers and supervisors track students’ progress on Chapter/Unit assessments to evaluate the effectiveness of the strategies/activities and determine whether additional supports are necessary. Specific attention is give to the major clusters in mathematics, as reflected in the Common Core Learning Standards. ● Involvement of PPT (Pupil Personnel Team) to address higher level at-risk behaviors as soon as possible and presentations by SAVE room teacher at staff conferences outline progress towards reducing numbers of suspensions/removals. When student focused is maintained on the tasks at hand, the better able students will be to meet the expectations of the Common Core Learning Standards. ● Paraprofessionals are included in all professional development sessions offered to teachers to ensure that they have equal access to the most current approaches to student attainment of the Common Core Learning Standards. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The Pre-K curriculum at P.S. 203K is aligned with the Pre-K Common Core Learning Standards in literacy, mathematics, science, social studies, art, and physical development and health. It is implemented with awareness of child developmental stages for 3-4-5 year-olds. Our Pre-K teachers are participating in the Work Sampling System for the 2018-2019 school year. They are focusing on the domains that will allow them to identify student strengths and offer supports in areas where more attention would be beneficial. As the school year progresses into the spring, transition events are planned where families of Pre- K aged students are given the opportunity to visit with our Kindergarten classes. Kindergarten teachers speak to parents before taking a tour of the classrooms and seeing “a part of the day in 0  the life of a kindergartner.” Incoming Pre-K families are also invited to a MEET the Pre-K event in June. School tours are also available to incoming parents by app't. with our parent coordinator. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. P.S. 203 has always leaned on its Ambassadors and strong teachers to support the decision making process regarding the assessments used in the school. Currently, to support the building Administration, as a baseline assessment measure we use the following: F and P levels, GoMath! assessments and those created by teachers to support the CCLS, and Teacher's College Writing rubrics. It is anticipated that through the guidance of our Ambassadors and the Instructional Support Specialists, we can further create assessments which cater to the diverse learning styles of our students. Further, our teachers have also met to create pacing calendars, ensuring that the curriculum would be covered in a timely manner, allowing for assessments to be conducted and monitored. In addition, our Measures of Student Learning team (consisting of 6 teachers and 2 administrators) met several times to select assessments in ELA and Math that capture student growth between the fall and spring. Following the fall assessments, Teacher Teams disaggregated the data and conversations ensued to determine what implications the results had for our current instruction. Supervisors are active either as participants or presenters at all professional learning opportunities surrounding curriculum 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) 1Explanation/Background: Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 515,930.00 142,834.00 11,200.00 0 3,703,569.00 x x x x Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b, 5d, 5e 6 5c 1  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 2  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 3  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 203, Floyd Bennett School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. In addition, we believe strongly in creating stress free events and performances which provide parents opportunities to enjoy and celebrate their children. We believe that these happy events increase comfort level, trust and inclusiveness within our school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P.S. 203, Floyd Bennett School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 4  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 5  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● Distributing a school newsletter and web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  Consistently utilizing school messenger to increase parental outreach School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 6  P.S. 203, Floyd Bennett School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; translators present at any PTA or parent meeting, when requested. 7  ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Inviting parents to multi-cultural celebrations including but not limited to, Lunar new Year, Cinco de Mayo, Thanksgiving and various holiday shows, performances and feasts. School Leadership and PTA collaborate on many events which help to build bridges across constituencies Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 8  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Celebrating children in a fun and engaging way to increase the comfort level parents feel in our school II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 9  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 0  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: A Title III program will run from November 28th 2018 to February 28th 2018. There will be two groups for the ENL after school program with a certified content area teacher in each. The first group will contain students who are at the “Entering or Emerging” stage based on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT. The second group will contain students who are at the “Expanding and Transitional” stage based on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT. The ratio of instructional time for teachers and students is based on and will include 2 groups of about 15 students each, after school, 2 days a week (Wednesdays and Thursdays) for 2 hours each day (2:20-4:20). We anticipate that we will be able to hire three certified ENL teachers, however if this is not possible we will hire Common Branch teachers. This program will be offered to the current grade 2-5 ELL students and the grade 2-5 Former ELLs from the past 2 years. This student group includes newcomers as well as long term ELLs, some with IEPs. It is anticipated that the classes will be taught in English by certified ENL teachers, using ENL methodologies, including differentiation, modeling and scaffolding. The data on assessments and previous NYSESLATs show that students particularly had trouble with the reading and writing portion of the NYSESLAT. After review of the 2018 NYSESLAT results, data shows that reading comprehension and writing development is a top priority in preparing the students for English language acquisition. Teachers will receive data based on their students in order to inform instruction. Teachers will also receive I-ready performance data sheets in order to target each student’s individual needs. Student notification letters, student attendance, and any relevant records will be maintained by the after-school ENL teacher. The after-school ENL teacher will support home language by having translation services available to the families, etc. Chall-Popp Phonics Level C books, Finish Line Reading books and Practice Exercises in Basic English books will be purchased to help increase the ELL's skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing. Supplemental materials will also be provided to the teacher in order to meet the needs of every student and prepare them all for success. These materials are distinct from those used for daily instruction in order to target language acquisition. The goal is to improve our student's English language development, which will result in achievement on the New York State Exams. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: It is planned that the Title III teachers will be given the opportunity for professional learning directly from the manufacturers of the purchased materials. Title III staff will be informed how to best use the leveled materials for their students and how to incorporate best practices for maximum impact. To address the professional learning specific to this program, Title III will pay 2  Part C: Professional Development for the training rate costs to cover the teachers strategically throughout the program. Through in class demonstration lessons, collaborative planning and mentoring, representatives from the publishing company will assist in insuring that the implementation of their program is high caliber. It is anticipated that the teachers will make outreach to those representatives to request professional development on relevant topics. The school will accommodate any Title III teacher's request to learn more about his or her students via input from the daily classroom teacher. It is expected that the teachers will look at the student work to set independent goals for all students in the program. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our Parent Coordinator, Darlene Joseph, will survey our ELL parents to determine topics of relevance for upcoming professional developments, which may include trips within New York City. We will stagger these events throughout the school year and will prepare a balance of afternoon and evening start times. Tentatively, those dates will be Tuesday, September 18, 2018 at 2:30 P.M., Tuesday, December 18, 2018 at 2:30 P.M., Thursday, March 21, 2019 at 6:30 P.M. The first professional development for parents will focus on the expectations of the ELL program, the materials and resources used, the role of the parents to the effectiveness of this program and the desired outcome of their child's English language development. After the initial professional development all ELL professional development will be open to all current and former ELL families. P.S. 203 has decided to utilize Fundations with our students. Parents will be notified via written notifications in their native languages, when necessary. Also, when necessary, outreach will be made to the Office of Translation Services for translators to be on sight for any professional developments. Further, carefully selected staff and members of our PTA at P.S. 203 are prepared to speak with families in the following languages; Spanish, French Creole, Arabic and Urdu. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) n/a 3 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a $12,366 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 22 School Name Floyd Bennett Borough Brooklyn School Number 203 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Yocasta Miller Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Dina Soliman Teacher/Subject Area Angeline Victor/IEP Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Faigi Ackerman Superintendent Julia Bove Assistant Principal Brian Sadowski Coach type here School Counselor Rhonda Peckman Parent Annette Montalvo Parent Coordinator Darline Joseph Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 808 5 Total number of ELLs 64 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.92%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The school uses Fountas and Pinnell to assess the students' reading levels and growth. Many of our new ENLs score low , however, after some time, trends establish that our ENL students make progress to increase by two- three and upwards of six or seven reading levels , especially in the earlier grades. The school is also using Fundations to assess ENL students and to use the curriculum in Fundations to support English Proficiency. Data from both Fountas and Pinnell benchmarks and Fundations help the ENL teacher and classroom teachers form groupings of students for Rti, inform after-school programs decisions regarding student placement, and to support classroom and ENL services. We will need to make sure that classroom teachers, ENL providers, and additional service providers check in more frequently with these specific students. Additionally, targeted reading instruction, through guided reading will be necessary to 6  support growth. It is anticipated that our ENL population will show growth comparable to their English proficient counterparts. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The administrative team, in association with the ENL teacher, placed all ENL students in the same class, by grade, whenever possible. These teachers have common planning time with the ENL teacher weekly. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Part of evaluating the success of an ENL program is looking at the Annual Yearly Progress (AYP). To begin, teachers working with ENL students first review the results from the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT. After trends are noted, the teachers can curtail instruction. During the school year teachers will use the ELA and Math BOY and EOY assessments. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Fortunately, all ENL students are offered placement in a Title 3 after-school program with curriculum to support their needs. The ENL teacher currently pushes into the classrooms of the grouped ENL students. In addition, many of our ENL students have IEPs, where they receive speech and counseling services. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] At the start of the school year, we review State data, F&P benchmark assessments, and on-demand writing assessments. Based upon all of the data reviewed, we determine the specific tier 1 activities within the classroom appropriate for each student. In addition, we invite any student in need to our after school program (tier 2 intervention). We determine whether the student needs ELA, or math (or a combination). Students are reassessed throughout the year to determine continuation of tier 1/tier 2 or if tier 3 intervention is necessary. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. P.S. 203 uses the NYSITELL, State Exams, and the NYSESLAT to evaluate and form our ENL program. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The prep schedule has been created with ENL student growth in mind. The classroom teachers have a common planning time with the ENL teacher. The ENL teacher is a frequent presenter to the staff during Monday PD days. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students within the general education or Integrated classrooms also range in a mixture of native language backgrounds. These students, however, receive their ENL services via a push-in ENL teacher. Students have been strategically grouped within their classrooms based upon their English proficiency. The ENL teacher works with her assigned students during content instruction to provide language acquisition and academic vocabulary support. This work is done in collaboration with the classroom teacher(s), and occurs in various “host” classrooms. The ENL teacher 7  must also push in to the special education classes on each grade. Therefore, the ENL teacher has different types of classrooms she must work with. Those scoring on beginning levels get additional time in the ENL classroom, as per CR Part 154.2 to be able to reinforce what is learned in the classrooms. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL teacher makes lists of the students and the mandates they are required to have. She makes a program and schedule based on teacher requests, other providers' schedules and student needs. The units of study per proficiency level are as follows: Entering and Emerging require 360 minutes per week, Transitioning and Expanding require 180 minutes per week, and Commanding (those who passed with the last 2 years) require 90 minutes per week. The ENL teacher does the best she can to ensure the mandates are being met. This information is added to STARS classroom. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers use the prescribed Core Curriculum to teacher all ENL students. Other subject areas, such as Writing and Art, are intertwined into these lessons in order to ensure cross-curricular connections and an interdisciplinary approach. Teachers model the tasks needed to succeed with the materials associated with their subject matter. Visual and Auditory aid, graphic organizers and pairing are some strategies used. English language is always spoken unless a student needs translation about a topic and a student or pedagogue who speaks that language is used. ENL teacher may go in to give support in the content areas or review topics in own classroom. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? N/A 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE: Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) are those who come from a home in which a language other than English is spoken and enter a school within the United States after Grade Two. Students within this sub-population must have had at least two consecutive years less schooling than their peers and as a result, function well below expected grade levels (by at least two years) in reading and mathematics. Some SIFE students may be pre-literate in their native language. Currently, there are no SIFE students enrolled within PS 203. However if we ever have SIFE students, a rigorous and tailored ENL program will been designed and implemented that draws upon the student’s cultural and academic backgrounds. Intervention will be implemented to incorporate best practices in ENL methodologies, while building background knowledge and literacy skills. When possible, technological support (i.e. computer assisted instruction) would be an integral part of the student’s day-to-day instruction. Newcomers: Students within the Newcomer sub-population are new to schooling within the United States and fall within service years 0-3. Some newcomers may have received adequate schooling in their native country and as a result, may be working at grade level. Those that are not, typically catch up academically due to working with an ENL provider. Other Newcomers may have had limited schooling in their native country or experienced minor interruptions. As a result, these students, typically, have limited native language literacy skills as well as poor academic achievement. To meet the needs 8  of this sub-population, special care is taken when placing the student within a general education classroom and matching the student with an ENL service provider. Students scoring Entering on the NYSITELL are placed within general education classrooms where the teachers have experience working with such students and, as a result, are able to accommodate their unique instructional needs (the same care is taken with those Newcomers scoring Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding on the NYSITELL). In addition, these teachers have been afforded training through professional development on the NYSESLAT, NYSESLAT data, and ENL methodologies. Additional language and curricular support is provided by an experienced ENL Push-in teacher based upon the concept of the strongest teacher working with the weakest students. This type of strategic student/teacher grouping helps ensure that our Newcomers receive instruction that is academically rigorous, yet highly comprehensible, connected to their individual experiences and supported with Best-Practice and ENL methodologies. Our Newcomers receive direct phonics instruction through Fundations, as well as native language support through the following: • Pairing them with a classroom partner or “buddy” who speaks the same primary language.• Encouraging them to talk in their primary languages, as well as English.• Providing our classroom and school libraries with bilingual texts that represent the primary languages spoken within our classroom and school, the best of our ability.• Use of bilingual students, paraprofessionals and/or parent volunteers who speak the same primary language in order to provide tutoring, to read to the students in their primary language and to assist the students with publishing books written in their native languages. ENLs: Students within the ENL sub-population have been enrolled in a public school within the United States and have received ENL services for a number of years (between 4-6) who struggle with English acquisition, especially academic language. Many ENLs are able to achieve adequate grades day-to-day, but do not perform as well on standardized tests. Some experience difficulties in all content areas. As a result, students within this sub-population require a great deal of instructional support to prevent them from becoming Long-Term ENLs. Some of our ENLs have been referred (by their respective classroom teachers) to our ENL teacher for assessment in order to determine possible reasons for their academic, social-emotional and/or cultural differences. Together, they will support our students by: • Observing students in classroom settings, during both whole-class lessons and independent work, in order to identify learning behaviors which may be contributing to experienced difficulties.• Meet/collaborate with classroom teachers and/or ancillary staff in order to discuss their observations, receive input and to determine additional screenings (i.e. sensory profiles, speech/language assessments, vision screenings, etc.) needed in order to gain a better understanding of each individual student. • Provide teachers and/or ancillary staff with strategies to assist with identified areas of challenge.• Provide individual remediation and/or assistance to students, as needed (i.e. Speech/Language services, Counseling services, Conflict Resolution, etc.).• Develop Action Plans/Goals for each small groups that draw upon their strengths, but that address their specific areas of weakness and/or challenge.• Review Action Plans/Goals and student progress with each small group, classroom teacher, ancillary staff, etc. on a regular basis, and make adjustments accordingly. In addition to the mechanisms mentioned above, students within this sub-population will continue to receive targeted interventions based upon their immediate needs via AIS/RTI and during after school and/or Saturday Academies. Additionally, Wilson/Fundations (research-based, multi-sensory reading and writing program that directly teaches the structure of words in the English language) is used by several classroom teachers and AIS staff to teach students within this sub-population the coding system for reading and writing. Further, programs that have been successfully piloted by other New York City Department of Education schools are also under consideration (pending available funding) as a means of providing additional targeted support. Long-Term ENLs: Students who have received schooling within the United States beyond 6 years of service. Students falling within this sub-population often times are able to speak English, but may not do so fluently. Similarly, these students may also not be literate in their native language. Long-Terms ENLs have received ENL services, but within different schools with programs that may not have been consistent. Nearly all Long-Term ENLS are below grade level in reading and writing, and continue to need ENL services in order to acquire academic English. Former ENLs: Students within the Former ENL (FENL) sub-population are also known as Former Limited English Proficient (FLEP). FENLs are students who have sufficient academic English language proficiency as measured by the NYSESLAT exam, and are able to function in a mainstream setting without the structured support of an ENL provider. Due to a concept referred to by Jim Cummins as Common Underlying Proficiency (CUP), many FELLs outperform their general education peers as a result of acquiring skills in both their native language and then in English. Jim Cummins’ CUP theory indicates that strategies known in one language (i.e. native language) is accessible in a second language (i.e. English) once the student acquires sufficient proficiency in the second language. The theory explains why so many FENLS are able to successfully transfer 9  the knowledge and skills developed in their native languages to the subjects being studied in English. The FENL sub-population will continue to receive services for two additional years. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Leveled books and workbooks are used as materials to access academic content. Modeling and scaffolding are instructional strategies used to help understand the content and accelerate language development. Because the children are in small groups they are comfortable to ask questions and respond with creative answers. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Curriculum units incorporate UDL considerations and teachers are trained in a variety of strategies so that there is flexibility in decision making at the classroom level to support ENL-SWDs in meeting their IEP goals and attaining English proficiency. ENL schedules are created based upon students linguistic needs. Through assessment, instruction and groupings, students are re-evaluated regularly and if required (based on student need/growth), scheduling can be altered. ENL-SWDs can be grouped with other ENL-SWDs and ENLs (non IEP), providing services within the least restrictive environment. Within the classroom, students are grouped regularly based upon student instructional needs, often times the groups contain a mix of general education students, ENLs, and SWDs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Programs will be established within the academic areas of ELA and Mathematics. The intent of these programs will be to help our students meet and/or exceed the Common Core Learning Standards assigned to their respective grades. Our goal, however, is to place special focus on our ENL population in order to maximize their English language acquisition, and to assist them in achieving the state-designated level of English proficiency for their grade. As a result, classroom teachers (push-in ENL and General Education ) will work closely with the Administrative and Instructional Teams in order to design targeted content area (including Science and Social Studies) instruction that is tailored to the specific needs of our ENLs, and that is rooted in best-instructional practices and ENL methodologies. The native language will not be included as we teach our classes in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? ENL students are offered whatever programs are available. Due to budget constraints there may not be any new programs. We have Math Fact fluency for math. We have flexible grouping, shared reading, and read aloud following science and social studies lessons. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are not discontinuing any of the current programs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. We have a Title 3 after school program offered to our ENL grades 2-5, as well as the former ENLs for 2 years. This is for twice a week, two hours each day, for a few months. Content areas such as Math, Science and Social Studies are taught. Former ENLs have this as additional support for 2 years after attaining a proficiency level of Commanding on their NYSESLAT. There is also OST after school. ENLs are offered to attend all the same programs, during and after school, as non ENLs because every student gets the information. Nobody is left out. It is their choice if they want to participate. Each year the representation changes but the Title 3 program usually has most participating. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 0  Instructional materials include: iReady, Leap Pad Library, Carousel of Ideas, Journeys English Language through Science, Fairy Tale and Folktale Big Books, New Heights Reading Program, Flash grammar books, Rigby leveled books and leveled workbooks such as: Speedy Spelling, Math Options, Hit the Ground Running, Just Right Reading, Math and Literature Connections, Approach and Connect Math, Connecting Vocabulary, Creative Ideas, Finish Line for ELLs and Writing Thesaurus. These books include the different content area subjects as well as different levels. This enables the ENL teacher to teach a variety of subjects at a variety of different levels. Every classroom has new technology, such as SmartBoards and Promethean boards to further support ENL students in many ways. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our ENL students are supported in their native language through the following:• Pairing ENLs with a classroom partner or “buddy” who speaks the same primary language. • Providing our classroom and school libraries with bilingual texts that represent the primary languages spoken within our classroom and school, to the best of our ability. • Use of bilingual students, paraprofessionals and/or parent volunteers who speak the same primary language in order to provide tutoring, to read to the students in their primary language and to assist the students with publishing books written in their native languages. In addition we offer the ENL students translations on the state tests, if available as native language support. We offer native language glossaries to assist on the tests. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Data will be thoroughly reviewed and analyzed during common grade level (i.e. Grade One, Grade Two, etc.) meetings and used to plan lessons, to differentiate instruction based on student grade needs, and to formulate flexible groupings of students needing enrichment (above grade level), review & practice (on grade level), re-teaching (slightly below grade level), and remediation (significantly below grade level). Additionally, acquired data will be further reviewed by administrators and our Instructional Team (comprised of grade level leaders and other ancillary staff in order to plan and implement differentiated professional development within the school community. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? P.S. 203 does not share a building, nor is it collocated. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). There are many forums by which new parents, including our ENLs, are provided opportunities to tour the building, meet staff and administrators, mingle with other new parents and most importantly meet the next year’s classroom teacher (all communicated bilingually) before the start of the school year in order to assist with the transition. School tours will be held. During these tours parents will be walked through the building with an administrator and current parents to observe the “everyday” climate of PS 203. Visits include classrooms, cafeteria, library, talent classes, offices, etc. This is a time when current PS 203 parents inform new parents about various parent related interests such as PA, various fundraisers, performances, Multicultural Night and so much more. The Welcome Breakfast, for families new to the school, takes place in September; it is when all new parents are welcomed into the PS 203 family. The Principal, Assistant Principal, parent coordinator, counselors, teachers, and parents speak with the parents about routines, expectations, procedures and opportunities available at PS 203. During the Curriculum Conferences, held at the end of September teachers open their doors to all parents and describe in detail their schedules, curriculum/units, expectations and of course contact information. We will host an ENL parent breakfast. At that time, the parents will be introduced to the ENL provider and the ENL program/data will be explained to them. Administrators, Parent Coordinator, and the ENL provider will be present. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not have language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: 1  a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Effective educators are constantly re-evaluating and rethinking their practices focusing on curriculum requirements, new information and research, and the day-to-day demands of teaching. It is our belief that in order to make the best teaching decisions for our students, we must be fully informed about credible research, exemplary teaching practices, the social aspects of learning, how our students develop as learners, etc. One of the best ways to continue to be knowledgeable is through engagement in ongoing professional development and conversations during grade level meetings/planning days, periodic professional development days, professional reading, and through the turn-keying of information acquired while attending workshops and seminars outside of the school. The ENL teacher goes and plans to attend monthly workshops with the Brooklyn South ENL Support Team. While our teachers have a number of opportunities available to develop themselves professionally, teachers have weekly professional opportunities to strengthen their collegiality and knowledge-base (which translates into higher student achievement). Through these professional forums, members of our entire school community partake in a number of activities from viewing and discussing high-quality teaching, engaging in thematic grade level planning, delving deeper in best practices/teaching methodologies (including ENL) and differentiated learning via study groups and working with in-house specialists in the areas of literacy, mathematics and ESL. Various professional development is provided to all teachers (including ENL teachers) weekly, covering various topics such as Miscue Analysis, Using miscue to plan for guided reading, math self-assessments, writing analysis using rubrics, data etc. All teachers receive training in the NYSESLAT, as well as NYSESLAT data analysis. We feel that familiarizing the staff with the NYSESLAT (Reading, Writing, Listening, and Speaking) will assist all teachers in good standards based literacy instruction. In order to help with consistency in planning and instruction, all staff members drill down the NYSESLAT data together. Sign-in sheets from all Professional development sessions are filled out and stored in a Professional development binder. In addition, at P.S. 203 our training in the Common Core began 6 years ago. All of our literacy and math units have been fully aligned to the Common Core Standards for the past 6 school years. While planning units and lessons, we review the common core standards associated with the unit, often times referring to student work that meets the standards. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. To support our students as they transition to Middle School, we offer a Grade 5 assembly to distribute directories. We spend time reviewing with students and teachers how to read the directory pages and how to read and interpret the middle school description pages. The guidance counselors, who are a part of our professional development sessions, assist the students, as well as the ENL students, as they transition from elementary to middle school. Attendance is taken at all staff development activities. The ENL teacher attends workshops and has opportunities to turnkey what she has learned at future workshops. 2  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our parent coordinator, Ms. Joseph, is available for parents with questions about our school and programs. She speaks Haitian Creole and helps to make our Creole speaking parents more comfortable. A packet of school information is given out to the newly enrolled ENL students in English and their language. The ENL teacher works closely with the parent coordinator to ensure the new families are invited to tour the school and have a meeting to introduce them to the school and its programs. There are also Spanish speaking staff members to help with translations for families who speak Spanish. We always have our ears open so whenever there are programs in the area for parents we invite them to attend. Our Occupational Therapist speaks Russian which has been very helpful in the past when we had a Russian family in the school. A translation survey is given out to all families who speak another language. The parents have the option to receive school information, report cards, and other information in their own language. We give our students handouts in their languages by having DOE paperwork translated. If the DOE doesn't send out translations then our parent coordinator sends it out for translations through the DOE. Parents are invited to attend PTA meetings and volunteer to help in our book sales, pumpkin sales, carnival and watch our monthly grade assemblies. When the parents participate they feel good about the school their children are in. Parents are invited to offered workshops. Parents are invited this year to join a nearby school who is giving English classes at night. Learning Leaders and school staff provide parent workshops. Many attendees are parents of our ENL students. Parents have developed a positive rapport with our parent coordinator making it easier for their needs to be known. Word of mouth also increases the number of parents making contact. Our school's parent coordinator also creates and distributes a survey to all families to determine topics for future workshops. There are tools in the school used for translation like the Talking Pen and the Talk and Listen Kit which both translate for parents use. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parental involvement is up to each family. We have a warm and welcoming rapport if they take the opportunities to join us for events and activities. Activities include parental engagement sessions for families on family reading and family health. We are planning more sessions for ENL families at least every two months. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. n/a 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Yocasta Dominguez-Miller, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Floyd Bennett School DBN: 22k203 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Yocasta Miller Title Principal Brian Sadowski Assistant Principal Darline Joseph Parent Coordinator Dina Soliman ENL/Bilingual Teacher Annette Montalvo Parent Faigi Ackerman Teacher/Subject Area Angeline Victor/IEP Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Rhonda Peckman School Counselor Julia Bove Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 22k203 School Name: Floyd Bennett Superintendent: Julia Bove The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Dina Soliman ENL Teacher YES YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. ATS is a first record of the students' languages based on the Home Language Identification Surveys. The information from the surveys is transferred to ATS. The ENL teacher copies and keeps as a record all the surveys. The codes are then compared to the ATS records to see if they are aligned. The school has created a parent survey to be administered early in the year to all the students who speak another language to determine both the need for and the availability of translation services. This survey is distributed once all the records are complete and the list of other languages is complete on ATS. The survey is a second record and second chance for the parents to let it be known that there is another language at home. This gives them the opportunity to inform us that they need translation services on specific things such as parent handouts and report cards, etc. The ENL teacher makes a chart and keeps a record of what the parents need. The ENL teacher keeps the surveys that are returned. The emergency cards very often have a second language listed if necessary. This 6  would be a third record to show language preference. It would also explain why the parent doesn't understand the person who has called them. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 818 16 43 43 22 5 4 2 1 1 0 English Arabic Spanish Haitian Creole Urdu Bengali French Punjabi Fulani Croation Sign Language 85.65 1.68 4.5 4.5 2.3 .52 .42 .21 .1 .1 0 809 14 43 47 25 5 3 2 1 2 4 84.71 1.47 4.5 4.92 2.62 .52 .31 .21 .1 .21 .42 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 7  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Newsletters, calendars, notices sent On-going throughout the year Family Engagement Flyer 12/16 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. These documents were submitted to the Translation and Interpretation Unit two weeks prior to distribution. The document was submitted to the Translation and Interpretation Unit two weeks prior to distribution. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide P.T.C. 9/13; 11/15;3/14;5/23 P.T.A. Monthly all school year E.L.A., Math, and Science Nights; Bedtime, Bears, and Books, etc. Scattered throughout the school year. interpretation service(s)? At the parent’s request, we will have translated documents such as report cards and promotion in doubt letters. When necessary teachers and/or parents may request in person or on phone translation services. At the parent’s request, we will have in person translation services at every P.T.A. meetings. If enough time permits, we will have all handouts translated for the families. We will have translated copies of all handouts, such as State Exams, Agenda’s, etc. If necessary, in-person translation services. N/A N/A N/A 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The school will abide by the appropriate protocols as set forth by the Building Response Team during an emergency. Staff will be given lists of student names that require their on-the-spot interpretation services should the emergency call for it. 8  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff will be emailed Chancellor’s Regulation A-663, in addition to the other relevant regulations. The ENL teacher will present to the staff the expectations of A-663 and remind them how to best meet ENL families in order for them to have the opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school identifies the families with another language through the Home Language Identification Survey. Our ENL teacher ensures that those who require language assistance services are provided a copy, in their native language, of the Bill of Parents Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services upon registering at the school. The Department of Education's Translation and Interpretation Unit and contracted vendors will be available to translate certain documents. Parents are notified of their rights to have translations available through signage at entrances to our school, main office and Parent Coordinator's office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The ENL teacher and the Parent Coordinator make follow-up conversations with the families who utilize the translation services provided by the Department of Education. Our school currently:  Developed a survey to determine to whom, how and to what extent communication has or will occur.   Conducted dialogue sessions to identify methods of collecting and disseminating information to all Identified underrepresented families via input from classroom teachers. stakeholders.  Provides open lines of communication for receiving comments and suggestions from parents and build the school's capacity to route this information to the intended persons.  Established multiple mechanisms for gathering opinions such as suggestion boxes, annual parent surveys, and random parent phone surveys. 9 
