 20K204 School Name: P.S. 204 VINCE LOMBARDI Principal: NANCY TOMASUOLO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Vince Lombardi Elementary School 20K204 332000010204 Pre-K through Grade 5 School Number (DBN): 8101 15 th Avenue Brooklyn , NY 11228 (718) 236-2906 (718) 232-9265 Phone Number: Fax: Nancy Tomasuolo Ntomasu@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Nancy Tomasuolo Trisha Arnold Melissa Scarpaci Michele Bennett Sabrina Pei N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 20 Karina Costantino Superintendent: 415 89 th Street Brooklyn, NY 11209 Superintendent’s Office Address: Kcostan@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 759-4912 Phone Number: (718) 759-4842 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) South Brooklyn MauriciereDeGovia FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89 th Street Brooklyn, NY 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 923-5171 Phone Number: (718) 326-8140 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Nancy Tomasuolo Trisha Arnold Melissa Scarpaci Sabrina Pei Maria Leibowitz Michele Bennett AlainaColella *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Staff Staff Staff   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) NatalyaTimofeyev DaniellaCamilleri Denise Cangemi Amanda Gallo Angie Huang Staff Parent Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS 204’s mission statement was created by in collaboration with both staff and students. It states: Section 4: CEP Overview “Our PS 204 family is committed to providing a safe, nurturing environment that supports student learning by building positive relationships and fostering high self-esteem. We celebrate diversity with respect for all cultures and learning styles. We provide rigorous instruction that challenges and engages all students while encouraging risk-taking, questioning and collaboration. We strive to develop life-long learners who aim to be the best they can be.”   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 204, the Vince Lombardi School, has been a fixture of the Bensonhurst community since 1929. Our current school enrollment is 1,155. Our school services students in grades Pre-Kindergarten through Grade 5. Although the composition of the school has changed throughout the years, our goal remains the same — to respect, appreciate and celebrate diversity while providing an outstanding educational experience. Our student population is comprised of many ethnic backgrounds including: Hispanic (18.63%); American Indian/Alaskan Native (.43%); Asian (53.20%); Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander (.08%); Black (.25%); White (27.12%) and; Multi-Racial (.25%). 17% of the students are English Language Learners and 14.5% are students with disabilities. We strongly believe that it is our responsibility and commitment to develop life-long learners. We are dedicated to providing our students with a rigorous and comprehensive instructional program, as well as, supporting them in developing their social and personal skills with the purpose of having them become productive members of society. We continue to implement our comprehensive Common Core-aligned literacy program, Journeys and our Go Math program with a focus on mathematical discourse to deepen conceptual understanding. Technology is an integral part of our instructional program. 100% of classrooms are equipped with a SmartBoard. Both our math and literacy programs have online resources for both teachers and students via the Think Central website. We currently have over 400 iPads for student use for school-wide technology-based programs such as Imagine Learning. An after school program facilitated by the Neighborhood Improvement Association (NIA) provides our students with homework support and instruction in dance, fitness and art. We participate in several residency programs including “Dancing Classrooms”. Our fifth grade students are provided with instruction in ballroom dancing, which culminates in a school performance and competition. Additionally, our fourth grade students participate in the “Inside Broadway” program in where a teaching artist visits our school to provide instruction related to the intricacies of Broadway culminating in a singing and dancing performance. Finally, students in our self-contained ENL classes participate in Theater Moves, which provides them opportunities to engage in teamwork, social awareness and performing the 'physicalization of language' as a means of preparing for the demands of the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT). Our school strongly believes in supporting the members of our community by participating in fund raising activities such as: Relay for Life, March of Dimes Walk-a-thon, City Harvest Food Drive, Gift Sharing and Hoops/Jump Rope for Hearts. Participating in these activities instills a sense of citizenship and provides our students with opportunities to learn the value of helping others. Parents are a vital part of our school community and we pride ourselves in fostering positive relationships with families in where ongoing and open communication consistently takes place among all stakeholders. According to the results of the 2017-2018 New York City School Survey, 96% of parents are satisfied with the education that their children are receiving. Throughout the year, our families have the opportunity to attend various school-wide events. These events include: Meet the Teacher Night, Family Fun Night, Holiday Sing Along, Winter and Spring Concerts, Band, Recorder and Music Performances, Ballroom Dancing Culminating Performance, Student of the Month and Award Assemblies. Each teacher also hosts two informative workshops over the course of the school year related to the Common Core Learning Standards, ELA and Math Curricula, strategies to assist students at home, the demands of the English Language Arts (ELA), Math and NYSESLAT exams, as well as workshops related to the Middle School 0  Application Process and supporting English Language Learners. We continually work to communicate with parents in their home language about school-wide activities through translated letters, text blasts (Remind 101) and our school website. We regularly update our website to share all pertinent information. The website also has a page for each class that individual teachers consistently update as a means of sharing valuable information with families. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. In the 2018-2019 school year, our school will be comprised of one (1) full-day pre-kindergarten classes; eight (8) kindergarten classes; eight (8) first grade classes; seven (7) second grade classes; seven (7) third grade classes; seven (7) fourth grade classes; and seven (7) fifth grade classes. There will be an Integrated Collaborative Teaching class (ICT) and a 12:1:1 class on each grade level. We have four physical education/health teachers, three music teachers, two art teachers, one library/media teacher and one science teacher. Our school currently has five Academic Instruction Services (AIS) providers (three for English Language Arts and two for mathematics), one Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS) teacher and one IEP teacher. Servicing our English Language Learners (ELLs), are four English as a New Language (ENL) teachers that provide integrated and stand-alone instruction, three classroom ENL teachers that provide self-contained ENL instruction and one bilingual teacher that provides Chinese Transitional Bilingual Education (TBE) instruction to 25 of our kindergarten students. Also included on our staff are related service providers for Speech, Occupational Therapy, Physical Therapy, Adaptive Physical Education and Hearing Education Services. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our instructional focus for the 2017-2018 school year was the school wide implementation of a more rigorous mathematical environment where students regularly engaged in discourse that focused on explaining their mathematical thinking. Teachers participated in professional development provided by the Core Collaborative to deepen their conceptual understanding of the math standards. In the 2018-2019 school year, we will continue to focus on planning rigorous standards-based math instruction that provides opportunities for student discourse in which students can explain their mathematical thinking to develop a deeper conceptual understanding of mathematical concepts. This requires revision to our current GoMath curriculum so that students have opportunities to solve rigorous word problems, engage in inquiry based explorations, and participate in student-centered discourse. Additionally, by having our teachers develop a richer and deeper understanding of their grade level math standards, we also intend to hone in on the assessment criteria that accompanies each standard so that the learning intentions teachers include in their lesson plans are meaningful, assessment-based, and able to drive instruction and discussion. In order to meet our goals within these areas of focus, we will continue to partner with the Core Collaborative led by Paul Bloomberg so that our teachers can engage in purposeful and meaningful collaborative inquiry work in order to create a mathematical environment where all students are engaged, challenged and empowered as mathematicians. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K204 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1178 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 77 78 46 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 25 21 46 46 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 77.0% % Attendance Rate 67.1% % Reduced Lunch 16.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 18.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 27.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.15 0% 9% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 71.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 97% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 72 71 46 96.2% 9.9% 13.7% 0.3% 53.1% 0.7% 6 0% 9.1 78.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS 204's strengths are summarized below:  There was an overall 8.6% increase in proficiency for Grade 3-5 students on the 2017 New York State Mathematics Exam as compared to the 2016 New York State Mathematics exam. The breakdown is as follows: Grade 3 Grade 4 Grade 5 Total 2016 66.3% 63.5% 58.2% 62.6% 2017 73.4% 74.2% 66.3% 71.2% Growth +7.1% +10.7% +8.1% +8.6%  Through our work with The Core Collaborative, Advance data demonstrates a 12% increase in effective/highly   effective ratings for Component 3c: Engagement in Learning Students began using the Lesh Translation Model when solving word problems where mathematical ideas are represented in five different modes: manipulatives, pictures, real-life contexts, verbal symbols and written symbols. It stresses the ability to represent mathematical ideas in multiple ways and the ability to make connections. It emphasizes that translations within and between various modes of representation make ideas meaningful for students. As evidenced by Advance observations, students are attempting to use multiple representations, but more focus is needed to help them make connections between and across representations. In mathematics, teachers and students began to implement the Structured Math Talk protocol, a mathematically productive teaching routine. This protocol gives the students opportunities for discourse between partners and gives teachers an opportunity to observe student discourse, actions and interactions that informs them about their mathematical understanding. It also provides formative assessment information that drives instructional decisions. PS 204's priority needs are summarized below:  Although there was an overall increase in student performance on the New York State Mathematics exam, item analysis revealed that students continue to struggle in the problem solving portion of the exam. They demonstrate a lack of thorough understanding of the mathematical concepts that hindered their ability to interpret what the problems are asking and identify what strategies could be used to correctly solve the problems. 3   Although we have implemented the Common Core aligned Go Math curriculum over the past few years, teachers often over-rely on the teacher's manual regarding the sequence of lessons, structure of the lesson, strategies presented and the administration of the Go Math assessments. Since the lessons are not always rigorous, they often do not produce increased and equitable mathematical engagement, understanding and/or achievement by all students. More importantly, as evidenced by Advance observations, students are not always given the opportunity to solve open-ended tasks and engage in mathematical discourse.  Data from the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide shows that 76% of teachers reported that students respond to challenging questions and 67% of teachers reported that students respond to challenging questions in class.  Adapting Go Math lessons is necessary to ensure that math lessons are aligned to the NYS Next Generation Standards and center primarily on the focus standards for each grade level. To support planning, teachers will use other math resources such as, Engage NY, activities from the book: Teaching Student-Centered Mathematics and other web-related resources. Teachers will determine the learning intention that will guide each lesson and the success criteria to determine how the students will show that they have made meaning of the learning intention. In addition, teachers will decide where in their daily lesson to include Structured Math Talk. Assessments will be revised based on the changes made to include open-ended tasks and rubrics will be created for scoring purposes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase for all students, including English Language Learners and Students with disabilities, receiving full-credit scores on constructed response questions assessing mathematical problem-solving skills and focus grade-level standards as evidenced by NYS Math Assessment results. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Classroom Teachers, Administrators and Math AIS Providers will participate in four Professional Development sessions facilitated by a consultant from The Core Collaborative. Teachers will deepen their knowledge of the Next Generation Math standards, identify learning intentions and develop "Success Criteria" for students. Teachers, Math AIS Providers Grade-level Professional Learning Community members will meet on a consistent basis to plan unit lessons and develop assessments/scoring rubrics. Lessons will be based on the Next Generation standards. Teachers in grades 4 and 5 will use multiple resources such as portions of the Go Math Curriculum and Engage NY. Teachers in grades K-3 will implement "Eureka Math" along with activities from the books: Teaching Student-Centered Mathematics and Developing Number Concepts. Classroom Teachers Math AIS Providers Teachers will plan at least one math workshop to promote parent engagement. The workshop will include an explanation of the content, how the content is being taught to students and an opportunity for parents and children to solve problems and participate in math activities. Teachers attended a voluntary "Lunch & Learn" Professional Development session dedicated to the online Zearn math program. Parent/Guardians Students Teachers Session One 9/24-9/28 Supervisors, Classroom Teachers, Math AIS Providers Core Collaborative Consultant Teachers, Supervisors, Curriculum Coach, Next 3 Sessions Dates TBD July 2018 & weekly from September 2018 to June 2019 October 1, 2018 - December 31, 2018 Teachers. Supervisors, Curriculum Coach October 24, 2018 Teachers Administrators Curriculum Coach Administrators Teachers will analyze student data from formative and end of unit assessments to identify trends and inform instruction. In grades 3-5, teachers and Assistant Principals will analyze data Teachers November 2018, January 5  Eureka Mathematics Consultant (Great Minds) Administrators Curriculum Coach Classroom Teachers 2019, March 2019 November 19, 2018 (2nd grade) December 10, 2018 (3rd grade) Future sessions TBD from the 2018 New York State Mathematics Exam in order to identify trends and areas in need of improvement. There will be a focus on the open-ended and constructed response questions. Classroom Teachers from K-5 will attend Professional Development workshops for Eureka Math. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 6  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage all parents and families and support their understanding of the work of around Rigorous Instruction in the following ways:  Teachers will plan and conduct at least one parent/student workshop focusing on the work being done in mathematics. Parents and students will have the opportunity to engage in math activities during those sessions.  The Curriculum Coach and our consultant from the Core Collaborative will facilitate a workshop introducing the changes in math instruction and the benefit of the change.  The Parent Coordinator will use translated invitations to conduct parent workshops focused on supporting English Language Learners in meeting grade level standards. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teachers, Curriculum Coach, Administrators, Parent Coordinator, Core Collaborative Consultant  Data Collected from state and school assessments  Go Math Curriculum/Eureka Math and corresponding assessments (Performance Tasks)  THINK CENTRAL/TECHNOLOGY  Next Generation Standards  Books: Teaching Student-Centered Mathematics & Developing Number Concepts  Kindergarten Station Teaching Resources   Eureka Math Resources/ Professional Development Zearn Online Program Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administrators will review lesson plans during each observation to analyze the degree to which teachers are including measurable, standards-based learning intentions and opportunities to solve high-level open-ended problems while engaging in student discourse. Administrators will collect data from classroom teachers regarding student performance on math assessments. Supervisors will analyze Advance data to track teacher performance related to Danielson component 1e: Designing Coherent Instruction. By February 2019 , 95% of ratings in the area of Designing Coherent Instruction will be effective or highly effective. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 7   Revised lesson plans and math assessments/rubrics  Advance data from teacher observations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Areas of Strength:  Based on 2017 – 2018 Advance data from teacher observations, 99% of teachers scored effective or highly effective in the area of Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport (2a) and 99% of teachers scored effective or highly in the area of Managing Student Behavior (2d). Our strength lies in making students feel supported and valued so they are comfortable taking academic risks. We strive to foster an atmosphere of respect for all and we always look for ways to build our school community which we view as a family.  During the 2017-2018 school year, we hosted an assembly program entitled "Box Out Bullying" for students in grades 2-5. This program focused on anti-bullying, empathy, and creating an overall positive atmosphere in all areas of the school community. Students were taught to recognize their own behaviors and to be empathic toward others at school.  During the 2017 – 2018 school year, we continued with our school-wide Character Education Book-of-the-Month program which was introduced in February 2016 and built upon our mission to provide a cohesive, respectful, inclusive school community. All stakeholders in our school community were provided with a copy of the book, lesson plans and theme related materials prior to introducing the text to our students. The books were related to important themes of tolerance, acceptance, kindness and respect. This initiative fostered a supportive learning environment for all of our school community members.  According to our 2017 – 2018 School Quality Guide, 95% of teachers say that adults at their school help students develop skills they need to complete challenging tasks. Additionally, 95% of teachers say they believe students can achieve high academic standards. Priority Needs to be Addressed:  According to the School Quality Guide, only 76% of teachers say students respond to challenging test questions and 67% of teachers say student respond to challenging questions in class.  Although our students feel supported and valued, they are not taking academic risks when faced with challenging tasks. We have identified this as an area of need and have begun to examine the research and work of Carol Dweck regarding growth mindset. We believe in Dweck’s theory that a growth mindset in the classroom can significantly improve student risk-taking and achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 9  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to positively influence school culture and increase student self-regulation skills, by June 2019 there will be a 10% reduction in the number of students in Grades 2-5 who have a fixed mindset based on comparing Beginning-of-Year and End-of-Year Mindset Self-Assessment. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In order to maintain a cohesive, respectful and inclusive school community, the first Junior and Senior assembly programs will be dedicated to Respect for All (Character Education Program) and the NYCDOE Student Intervention and Discipline Code and Bill of Student Rights and Responsibilities. As part of the assembly program, students will be made aware of the importance of school safety and behavioral expectations in our school community. All students in PreK-5 including students with disabilities and English Language Learners Sept. 2018 Supervisors, Classroom Teachers, Staff In September 2018, teachers will be introduced to the book "The Growth Mindset Coach: A Teacher's Month by Month Handbook for Empowering Students to Achieve." This book will serve as a guide for teachers to create a growth-oriented environment in their classroom through the use of monthly mantras, scientific research, lesson plans, and strategies to explore using growth mindset in different areas of teaching. Beginning in September 2018, teachers and staff members will continue the work of the Book-of-the-Month program. This year, the focus of these books will be based on the development of a growth mindset. By implementing the Book-of-the-Month program with pieces of literature related to mindset, we will help teachers to cultivate the idea that intelligence and other qualities, abilities and talents can be developed with effort, learning and dedication. The following texts will be utilized in subsequent months: Flight School, by Lita Judge   Your Fantastic Elastic Brain, by JoAnn Deak  The Girl Who Never Made Mistakes, by Mark Pett  The Most Magnificent Thing, by Ashley Spires  Chocolate Milk, Por Favor, by Maria Dismondy Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Supervisors, Curriculum Coach, Teachers Teachers, All students in PreK-5 including students with disabilities and English Language Learners Sept. 2018 -June 2019 Supervisors, Curriculum Coach, Teachers, Staff 1  Included on the monthly calendar of events distributed to parents will be the monthly focus/mantra, the name of the book being studied in class, as well as tips and strategies that can be used at home to reinforce the value of growth mindset. In order to provide deeper support for students and their families, we will offer a parent workshop by youth motivational speaker, Dr. Blake Brandes designed to support parents and guardians in understanding and implementing the Growth Mindset with their children. All staff attended a Professional Development session regarding "Growth Mindset" vs "Fixed Mindset". Parents Parents, All students in PreK-5 including students with disabilities and English Language Learners Teachers March 2019 to June 2019 (monthly) February 26, 2019 Administrators, Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator, Curriculum Coach, Teachers November 6, 2018 Teachers Administrators Administrators Paraprofessionals School Aides Guidance Counselors Staff members attended a Professional Development session presented by the School Mental Health Consultant on Mindfulness and Stress Reduction. Teachers November 19, 2018 Paraprofessionals Guidance Counselors Administrators Curriculum Coach Guidance Counselors School Mental Health Consultant, Donna Poon Teachers Administrators 2  Guidance Counselors Students in Grades 2-5 attended a "Growth Mindset" assembly program presented by students from PS 112. Teachers November 21, 2018 Students (Grades 2-5) Administrators Teachers Administrators Guidance Counselors Students from Grades PreK through Five attended a Growth Mindset assembly: "The Ned Show" to promote the messages: "Never Give Up";" Encourage Others" and "Do Your Best". Students Teachers November 27, 2018 "The Ned Show" Presenter Teachers Aministrators Teachers, staff February 25, 2019 Supervisors, Curriculum Coach February 26, 2019 PTA, Supervisors, Teachers All students in PreK-5 including students with disabilities and English Language Learners We will host a presentation for teachers and school staff by Dr. Blake Brandes aimed at deepening our understanding of the growth mindset and how to support students in the classroom. This professional development session will provide teachers with practical ways to implement Growth Mindset messages and ideas in the classroom. We will hold a school-wide assembly program presented by Dr. Blake Brandes focused on developing growth mindset. The assemblies will be targeted to three different grade bands of students in order to be grade-specific and age appropriate. The outcomes of the Growth Mindset and Grit assemblies are to help students feel excited to learn new things (rather than feeling afraid or discouraged) and to help them keep going when they encounter challenges in their educational and personal lives. This work is based on the research of Carol Dweck (author of Mindset) and Angela Duckworth (author of GRIT). 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage all parents and families and support their understanding of the work of Supportive Environment in the following ways: 3   Our teachers, parent coordinator and curriculum coach will conduct parent workshops designed to support parents and guardians in understanding and implementing the Growth Mindset with their children.  Monthly calendars will be sent home to families sharing school-wide events, as well as the book-of-the-month and mantra/theme-of-the-month. These calendars are posted on our translated school website. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teachers and Paraprofessionals  Guidance Counselor  Curriculum Coach  Administrators  Parent Coordinator  Dr. Blake Brandes, youth motivational speaker  Professional Development Sessions  Books of the Month (10 Titles)  Assembly Program  Parent Workshop  Professional Books: The Growth Mindset Coach by Annie Brock and Heather Hundley  Monthly calendar    PS 112 5th Grade Students and Teachers  Assembly Program for "Chocolate Milk Por Favor" School Mental Health Consultant, Donna Poon "The Ned Show" Presenter Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, the following benchmarks will have been met:  Our school community will have participated in the Book of the Month Program as evidenced by completion of three selected texts.  Our school community will have participated in 2 assemblies related to growth mindset activities presented by outside organizations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A mindset survey will be given in November 2018 and will be re-administered in June 2018 to assess the percentage of shifts on the mindset spectrum. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Areas of Strength relative to this Framework Element:  Based on 2017-2018 Advance data, 93% of ratings in Component 3c: Engaging Students in Learning were effective/highly effective. According to 2016-2017 Advance data, only 81% of ratings were effective/highly effective. In the 2016-2017 school year, as evidenced by Advance observations, administrators noticed that students were not being given the opportunity to engage in daily problem-solving activities, including solving problems in a variety of ways, reasoning mathematically and communicating math ideas with their peers. Therefore, during the 2017-2018 school year, Professional Learning Communities received ongoing professional development by The Core Collaborative focused on providing opportunities to students for applying various problem solving strategies in order to better engage in mathematical discourse.  During the 2017-2018 school year, teachers and administrators engaged in professional development sessions in where they learned how to create student-centered approaches to learning, increase student ownership of learning and provide opportunities for collaborative learning that was more responsive to the strengths and needs of students. As evidenced by Advance ratings, teacher participation in these professional development sessions positively impacted teachers' ratings in 3d: Assessment in Instruction (97% effective/highly effective in 2017-2018 as compared to 87% in 2016-2017).  According to data from the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, in regards to the professional development received by teachers, 97% of teachers said their professional development has been sustained and coherent, 95% of teachers said they had opportunities to work productively at school and 94% of teachers said their professional development included time to think about, try and evaluate new ideas. Priority Needs to be Addressed:  Despite the increase in Advance Data, as well as the positive feedback from teachers regarding the professional development received, according to the School Quality Guide, only 77% of teachers reported that they have influence over the development of instructional materials. As evidenced by classroom observations, most grades adhered to the Go Math Curriculum as it was designed and did not veer away from the daily instructional plan even though they were encouraged to make curricular adjustments.  Additionally, despite the increased focus on mathematical discourse and exploration of multiple mathematical strategies embedded in lessons, only 74% of teachers say that students build on each others' ideas during class discussions and/or use data and evidence to support their ideas. As evidenced by classroom observations, it was evident that although teachers were including word problems in their lessons, the problems were not always rigorous or complex enough for students to grapple with and discuss in partnerships at length. 5  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, 100% of classroom teachers will collaborate in their Professional Learning Communities to plan rigorous, standards-based math units of study following an inquiry-based lesson structure utilizing the Go Math curriculum, Eureka Math Curriculum and/or other professional texts such as, Teaching Student-Centered Mathematics by John VanderWalle (Grades 1-5) and Developing Number Concepts, by Kathy Richardson (Grades K-1) as evidenced by unit plans, formative assessments and end-of-unit assessments. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers will meet with members of their Professional Learning Communities to deepen their knowledge of unpacked focus math standards and develop lessons that provide students opportunities to problem solve in multiple ways, explore rigorous math concepts with manipulatives, and engage in partnership discourse. Teachers Sept. 2018-June, 2019 Teachers (Weekly) Administrators Curriculum Coach In association with The Core Collaborative, every classroom teacher will participate in professional development sessions facilitated by a consultant from The Core Collaborative centered around cultivating a rigorous mathematics environment where all students are engaged in investigating math concepts, wrestling with complex ideas and making sense of math content through rigorous instruction. Teachers Sept. 24-28, 2018; Future dates TBD Educational Consultant Teachers Administrators Curriculum Coach Educational Consultant For each mathematics unit of study, Professional Learning Community members will incorporate multiple formative assessments (i.e. open-ended, constructed response questions) to evaluate student performance. Success criteria will be incorporated into the assessments and aligned to the focus standards of each unit so as to provide students ongoing opportunities for self-assessment. Teachers will plan workshops to foster parent participation and involvement in the classroom. These math workshops will enable students and parents to problem solve, play games, share strategies and discuss standards and curriculum together. Teachers will analyze student data from the beginning of the year, middle of the year and end of the year assessments, including the open-ended formative assessments and end of unit assessments to identify trends across the grade and inform instruction. During informal and formal observations, Administrators will focus on the components: 1e: Designing Coherent Instruction (lesson plan structure), 3b-Questioning and Discussion Techniques (discourse between partners), 3c-Engaging Students Teachers Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Administrators, Curriculum Coach Parents and students Sept. 2018- June 2019 All teachers in grades K-5 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Administrators, Curriculum Coach Teachers Administrators, Curriculum Coach Educational Consultants Teachers Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Administrators 7  in Learning (rigorous math tasks), and 3d-Assessment in Instruction (problem solving success criteria). In grades 3-5, teachers and assistant principals will analyze data from the 2018 New York State Math Assessment to identify trends and areas in need of improvement specifically in the open-ended/constructed response questions. Grade level focus standards will be unpacked by the curriculum coach and shared with grade level Professional Learning Communities to guide planning. Math AIS teachers will provide needs-based, differentiated instruction for students by varying teaching techniques and modifying tasks with the use of manipulatives to allow students to explain their strategies and participate in "math talk" with their peers. Teachers Nov. 2018- April 2019 Teachers, Administrators Teachers Sept. 2018- June 2019 Curriculum Coach Math AIS Teachers Sept. 2018- June 2019 Math AIS Teachers, Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage all parents and families and support their understanding of the work of Collaborative Teachers in the following ways:  Teachers will conduct a minimum of one parent workshop devoted to mathematics inquiry-based instruction in where they will communicate with families the grade-level changes to the mathematics curriculum, discuss ways that they can support their children at home, and provide opportunities for children and their care-takers to play math games, use manipulatives and engage in problem solving tasks together.  Monthly Parent Teacher Association meetings will serve as ongoing opportunities to inform families of the status of our math planning, curricular changes, professional development focus areas, and to gain insight from families as to how we can best support families in completing homework, developing mathematical understanding, and preparing for assessments. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teachers  Curriculum Coach  Administrators  Educational Consultant from "The Core Collaborative" 8   Think Central/Go Math Online Resources  Engage NY materials  Professional Books: Teaching Student Centered Mathematics by John A. VanderWalle and Developing Number Concepts by Kathy Richardson Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, the following benchmark will have been met: Each grade-level Professional Learning Community will have made curricular revisions to 50% of their units as evidenced by revised unit plans following an inquiry-based lesson structure and will have created corresponding formative and end-of-unit assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Advance scores in components 1e: Designing Coherent Instruction, 3b: Questioning and Discussion Techniques, 3c: Engaging Students in Learning and 3d: Assessment in Instruction  Evidence of student engagement in problem-solving activities and accountable talk  Collaborative teacher team meeting agendas and attendance sheets   Grade-level formative and end-of-unit assessments Lesson and Unit Plans reflecting the structure of: "launch", "explore", "summarize", "practice" Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Areas of strength:  Based on our 2017-18 School Quality Guide results, 100% of teachers agree that the administration has a clear vision for the school and makes expectations for meeting instructional goals clear to the staff. Our instructional focus and our CEP goals were communicated to staff in September of 2017 and revisited throughout the school year to ensure alignment of our ongoing professional development.  Our 2017-18 Advance Teacher observation data reveals significant improvement in all three components of Domain 3. Specifically, 88% of teachers scored effective and highly effective in Component 3b: Questioning and Discussion Techniques, which is a 6% increase from the year prior. In addition, 93% of teachers scored effective or highly effective in Component 3c: Engaging Students in Learning, which is a 12% increase from the year prior. Lastly, 97% of teachers scored at effective or highly effective in Component 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction, which is a 10% increase from the year prior. We attribute this growth to our exploration of the inquiry approach to math instruction with an emphasis on posing high level problems for students to solve and discuss. We plan to continue this work as we plan lessons that align to the NYS Next Generation Learning Standards using Go Math as a resource. Teachers will need ongoing support from administration as those lessons are developed and executed. Last year we saw an 8% increase in the percentage of students scoring at Levels 3 and 4 on the NYS Math Test, which went up from 63% in 2016 to 71% in 2017. We attribute this to our instructional focus on mathematics, which included professional development around increasing rigor and applying the gradual release of responsibility approach to instruction. This was geared toward maximizing the amount of time students spent actually solving math problems during lessons.  Priority needs to be addressed:  Despite the significant increase in NYS Math Test scores from 2016 to 2017, we continued to see an over-reliance on the Go Math Teachers Manuals, which was preventing teachers from posing challenging problems and providing students with enough time to solve them on their own. At the same time we saw on the School Quality Guide that only 77% of teachers feel they have influence over instructional materials. As such, we made it a priority to give teachers permission to deviate from the Go Math script. This led us to explore a new inquiry-based approach to math instruction where teachers pose problems for students, let them persevere in solving them by representing their thinking in multiple ways using the Lesh Translation Model and discuss their thinking with partners using Structured Math Talk protocols. This exploration happened through our professional development sessions with the consultant from the Core Collaborative.  Teachers do see students making progress when they analyze performance on Go Math chapter tests. However, we noticed that the questions on the chapter tests are not as rigorous as those on the NYS Math Test. In particular, they do not provide enough opportunities for students to solve word problems that require them to represent their mathematical thinking in multiple ways. We determined it would be important to revise the assessments we administer making sure they match the standards, rather than the Go Math 0  curriculum. As a result, we will choose new assessments with open-ended questions that are aligned to the standards and scored using standards-based rubrics. In order to choose new assessments and develop such rubrics, our teachers need to increase their familiarity with the NYS Next Generation Learning Standards.  Teachers need ample time to become comfortable with unpacked math standards and to develop standards-based lesson plans and unit maps. This will occur in large part on Monday afternoons during professional development time, which needs to be more focused with clear expectations for what the professional learning communities at each grade level will produce. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, administration will support teachers as we deepen our understanding of the Next Generation Learning Standards in the area of mathematics by ensuring that 50% of all school-wide professional development sessions and grade-level professional learning community sessions are dedicated to the work of The Core Collaborative as evidenced by PD and PLC agendas, notes, attendance sheets, and math lesson/unit plans. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administrators and teachers will participate in professional development sessions led by an educational consultant from The Core Collaborative. These PD days will focus on using unpacked standards to plan and implement rigorous math instruction that poses high level problems to students and provides them with opportunities to explain their mathematical thinking. Administration will ensure that at least 50% of our Monday afternoon PD time will be dedicated to PLC sessions where teachers are able to use unpacked math standards to plan math lessons/units, determine success criteria and develop assessments. Teachers will be provided with templates and protocols to assist them in their planning. Administrators will make use of formal and informal observations to provide teachers with feedback that will improve their practice and increase their level of comfort and familiarity with the Inquiry-based instructional approach and the teacher-developed math lesson/unit plans. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Education Consultant, Assistant Principals, Principal, Curriculum Coach Classroom Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Assistant Principals, Principal, Curriculum Coach Classroom Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Assistant Principals, Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be made aware of the focus of our partnership with The Core Collaborative, which is planning and implementing rigorous math instruction that is aligned with the Next Generation Learning Standards and deepening students' conceptual understanding. Families will also have opportunities to learn about how teachers and students use success criteria. This will be accomplished in the following ways:  The School Leadership Team will regularly discuss the math work taking place in the classrooms. Teachers and administrators will share student work samples, rubrics, and adjustments made to the Go Math curriculum. Members of the team will disseminate the information to their constituents.  Teachers will host at least one family engagement activity during the school year to give parents an opportunity to work with their children in the classrooms as they engage in math activities (performing tasks, solving open-ended problems, playing games, and/or participating in structured talks).  Our educational consultant from The Core Collaborative will conduct a parent workshop to provide information, handouts and resources to families regarding the math standards and math instruction. 2  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Administrators  Teachers  Curriculum Coach  Educational Consultant from The Core Collaborative  Go Math Curriculum/ Engage NY Math Curriculum  Unpacked standards documents and corresponding online resource Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, the following benchmark will have been met:  50% of the math units on each grade (K-5) will have been revised to include lesson plans that utilize the inquiry-approach to instruction where students spend time solving high level problems, represent their mathematical thinking in multiple ways, and engage in conversations that connect those representations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.    grade-level math pacing calendars; unit plans and lessons the analysis of student performance on open-ended math assessments being administered in lieu of the Go Math chapter tests success criteria visibly posted in classrooms for student and teacher reference Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Areas of Strength:  Based on positive feedback from parents/guardians that participated in parent workshops related to child-rearing skills and social/emotional intelligence (i.e. positive reinforcement, discipline, bullying, parent/child self-regulation and de-escalation strategies). We plan to continue to engage families and the community in meaningful and mutually beneficial ways to promote each student’s academic success and well-being. Priority Areas of Need:  According to our 2017-2018 NYC School Survey Report, we made gains of 7 percentage points in the area of Strong Family-Community ties. 95% of our parents/guardians (up from 88% of parents) responded positively in the areas of strong family-community ties. As we are pleased with the growth, this element of the Framework for Great Schools, continues to have the lowest rating on our School Quality Review Report. This a relative weakness, but something that we will focus our attention on. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, 100% of stakeholders in the school community, will build common language and pathways via the integration of Social Emotional Learning and the instructional core, as evidenced by school-wide implementation of SEL and growth mindset practices, as well as, parent workshop attendance sheets, and feedback surveys. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent Surveys will be distributed by the Parent Coordinator regarding how Parent Engagement afternoons can be best utilized. Survey results will assist teachers and staff in scheduling workshops and deciding topic for workshops. Parent surveys will also invite parents to identify topics related to Social Emotional Intelligence that are of interest to to them and will assist them in supporting their child/ren. Parents and/or Guardians Dec. 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Teachers, Curriculum Coach, Parent Coordinator, Support Staff Teachers will meet with individual parents on Tuesday afternoons to discuss student progress and offer strategies to support them at home. Parents and/or Guardians Sept. 2018-June 2019 Guidance Counselors and our School Mental Health Consultant will conduct at least 4 workshops for parents and staff related to Social Emotional Learning and its connection to academic progress. Teachers Parents and/or Guardians Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Teachers, Curriculum Coach, Parent Coordinator, Support Staff Administrators, Teachers, Curriculum Coach, Parent Coordinator, Support Staff Teachers will conduct a minimum of three parent/student workshops over the course of the year that will be based on our school-wide initiatives of developing a growth mindset and increasing the rigor of mathematics instruction. An Educational Consultant from The Core Collaborative will attend an evening PTA meeting in the fall and again in the spring to share the focus, goals and concepts behind the math work taking place in grades K-5 Parents and Guardians, Sept. 2018-June 2019 The Core Collaborative Consultant, Curriculum Coach and Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We will engage parents and families and support their understanding of the work of Supportive Environment in the following ways: 5   At least one of the workshops must engage parents and students in self-awareness and self-regulating activities. Another workshop must engage parents and students in math activities that highlight the type of instruction students are receiving to include performing tasks, solving open-ended problems, playing games and/or participating in structured math talks. The third parent/student workshop can be developed by each teacher based on the needs and interests of the parents in the class.  Dr. Blake Brandes will inform parents about strategies their child/ren have been introduced to at school while participating in Growth Mindset work. Parents will learn how to better help their child/ren, recognize their inherent power and encourage them to create lives they love by proactively changing their perceptions and actions. A Community Based Organizations that partners with our school is NIA (Neighborhood Improvement Association). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teachers  Curriculum Coach  Administrators  Parent Coordinator  Parent Survey Data  After school /Evening Family Events  Parent Workshops  P.S. 204 Website  Dr. Blake Brandes, youth motivational speaker Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, the following benchmarks will have been met: All teachers will have conducted one of the three parent workshops. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Engagement Logs Workshop Agendas Workshop Attendance Sheets School Learning Environment Surveys Parent Surveys 6  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) English Language Arts (ELA) --Performance on NYS ELA exam for students in grades 3-5 --Performance on the TC Reading Assessment for students in grades K-2 --Classroom performance based on formative and summative assessment data including Journeys assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) --Guided reading --Explicit reading strategy instruction --Front loading of concepts, vocabulary, and strategies --Repeated readings --Interactive writings Mathematics --Performance on NYS Math exam for students in grades 3-5 --Explicit math strategy instruction --Classroom performance based on formative and summative assessment data including newly created mathematicsassessments --Classroom performance based on formative and summative assessment data --Interactive problem solving --Front loading of concepts, vocabulary, and strategies --Repetition of content --Content area emphasis is incorporated into non-fiction literacy instruction in classrooms and AIS programs Science When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) --During the school day --After school program --During the school day --After school program During the school day Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) --Small group instruction by classroom teachers --Small group push in and pull out instruction by AIS teachers --Whole class and small group instruction by after school program teachers --Small group instruction by classroom teachers --Small group pull out instruction by AIS teacher --Whole class and small group instruction by after school program teachers --Small group instruction by classroom teachers --Small group push in and pull out instruction by AIS teachers 8 Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) --Classroom performance based on formative and summative assessment data --Content area emphasis is incorporated into non-fiction literacy instruction in classrooms and AIS programs --Classroom performance At-risk counseling --Teacher observations --Small group instruction by classroom teachers During the school day --Small group push in and pull out instruction by AIS teachers Small group and one-on-one During the school day --Parent requests 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 15 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. -Guidance Counseling -Academic Intervention Services in various content areas -Financial Support: school supplies, books, transportation, clothing, glasses, trip money, etc. -Providing families with holiday gifts and holiday food baskets Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Administrative staff uses the DOE Open Market Transfer System and the DOE New Teacher Finder to recruit highly qualified teachers when vacancies arise. In addition to interviewing candidates, we ask that they perform demonstration lessons. ● Mentors are assigned to support new or struggling teachers. ● Inter-visitations are scheduled for new or struggling teachers. ●All teachers are highly qualified as verified by our HR person to ensure that all teachers hold valid NYS certification in the license area. The BEDS survey is reviewed by our HR person who works with our school to ensure that teacher assignments are aligned with license areas. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  Ongoing professional development for teachers of English Language Learners focused on Advanced Literacy, increasing academic language, the demands of the NYSESLAT, appropriate scaffolds for ELLs across subject areas, and success criteria.  Professional development takes place regularly on Monday and Tuesday afternoons, as well as, during Lunch and Learn sessions. Topics include Imagine Learning, Culturally Responsive Teaching, and Lesson Planning for ELLs  An Educational Consultant from The Core Collaborative will provide 6 (or more) sessions of professional development to classroom teachers focused on creating a mathematical environment, unpacking the math standards and developing standards-based success criteria Teachers and paraprofessionals are invited to attend pertinent professional development sessions offered outside the school.  2  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). We assist preschool children from early childhood programs into the elementary school program in several ways. Our parent coordinator facilitates a school tour for incoming parents. Our kindergarten teachers host class orientations for parents and students. Our Pre-K and kindergarten teachers meet to share records, exchange information, and align curriculum to ensure that students are prepared for the demands of kindergarten. Our Pre-K teachers are also included in our professional development activities. We also work to identify our Pre-K students as English language learners and/or students with special needs so we can immediately accommodate them appropriately in kindergarten and beyond. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● Members of our school MOSL (Measures of Student Learning) Committee, which include the UFT chairperson, the principal, assistant principals, classroom and out-of-classroom teachers, meet several times during the spring, summer, and fall to review and select the State and Local assessments that will be utilized for teacher evaluation. The decisions made collaboratively by this committee drive our school-wide implementation of periodic assessments. Selections are presented to the staff in September. ● Teachers regularly meet in grade level Professional Learning Communities where they make decisions about the types of assessments to be administered to students. They design and/or make use of available assessments, performance tasks, checklists and rubrics. They use results of these assessments to plan whole class and small group instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 3 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 690,089.00 Title II, Part A Federal 150,755.00 Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal 21,454.00 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 6,929,534 Column A Verify with an (X) X X X N/A X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A , 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E; Section 6 Section 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, Section 6 Section 5A N/A Section 5A, 5B,5C, 5D, 5E, Section 6 Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 4   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy PS 204 Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Title I Parent Involvement Policy for PS 204 Section I: Title I Parent Involvement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 204, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 6 Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  PS 204 will support parents and families of Title I students by: 1. providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level (e.g., literacy, math and use of technology); 2. fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; 3. providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 4. sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand 5. providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; PS 204’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. `Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the PS 204 Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parent members of the school’s Parent Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, PS 204 will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Advisory Council. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the Central Office for Family Engagement and Advocacy (OFEA); conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  7   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system (e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;)  host the required Title I Parent Annual Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings (e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed   PS 204 will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Open School Week and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Team, Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Advisory Council; supporting or hosting OFEA District Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center or lending library; instructional materials for parents.  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress This Parent Involvement Policy (including the School-Parent Compact) was distributed for review by Michele Bennett on November 1, 2018 This Parent Involvement Policy was updated on November 1, 2018 The final version of this document will be distributed to the school community on November 3, 2018 and will be available on file in the Parent Coordinator’s office. A copy of the final version of this policy will also be submitted to the Office of School Improvement as an attachment to the school’s CEP and filed with the Office for Family Engagement and Advocacy. School-Parent Compact (SPC) 8  PS 204K SCHOOL-PARENT COMPACT P.S. 204, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards   Offering high quality instruction by highly qualified teachers in all content areas I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:  Conducting parent-teacher conferences 4 times per year  Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st  Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education  Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children.  Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information  Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with parents with limited English speaking parents;  Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment;  Planning activities for parents during the school year Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 9   Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community  Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards   Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement  Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time  Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary  Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations  Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested  Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities  Attend school regularly and arrive on time  Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time Show respect for myself, other people and property   Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully  Always try to “Be the best that I can be!” 0  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: PS 204 currently enrolls approximately 1,110 students, 152 of whom are English Language Learners (14%). By the close of the 2017-2018 school year, 200 students (approximately 17% of the total student population) were English Language Learners. This reflected a 2% increase in ELLs (from 15%) from the 2016-2017 school year. We, therefore, make it a top priority at PS 204 to ensure our ELLs receive intensified, scaffolded and data driven English Language Arts and Core Subject Area instruction within the school day in accordance with CR Part 154.2 (360 minutes for Entering and Emerging ELLs, 180 minutes for Transitioning and Expanding ELLs, and 90 minutes for Commanding ELLs including the appropriate Integrated and/or Standalone Instruction as required by CR Part 154.2). In addition to ensuring that our students receive their weekly mandatory minutes of ENL (English as a New Language) during the school day, we annually identify approximately 100 students who, based on their previous year’s NYSESLAT results and formative classroom data, would benefit from additional, supplemental, targeted ENL instruction in our ENL After School program to reinforce and scaffold students' classroom learning. During our school day, we use the Common Core aligned Journeys literacy curriculum in all of our classrooms in grades K-5. During Standalone ENL instruction, our ENL teachers also implement the specified ELL components of the program which includes leveled small-group reading text sets, vocabulary picture cards, scaffolded questioning and graphic organizers. Based on the results of the end-of year Teachers College Reading Assessments (June 2018), Journeys End-of-Unit Assessments, ongoing formative classroom data, school-wide Advance Observation data, as well as, a deep analysis of the data from the 2018 NYSESLAT, we are able to conclude that our students made great strides in the speaking and writing modalities of the NYSESLAT as compared to the previous year's results. These two modalities now represent relative areas of strength for the majority of our ELLs. According to the data from the 2018 NYSESLAT, approximately 96% of our students moved one or more levels and approximately 40% of our students scored at the Commanding level (as compared to 17% scoring Commanding in 2017). Beginning last school year, our professional learning sessions with our vertical ENL Inquiry Team, become focused on and dedicated to analyzing the the EDAT (ELL Data Analysis Tool Student), NYSESLAT Analysis Report, the NYSESLAT Writing Performance Level Descriptions and our English Language Arts curriculum. Using this information, and the turnkey information we receive from professional development sessions provided by the Brooklyn South Field Support Center, we brainstorm ways to focus on a deep immersion in the study and application of increasing academic language for ELLs. The ENL Inquiry Team meets on an ongoing basis during their Professional Learning Communities to analyze data, methodology, standards and curriculum so that we can create standards-based success criteria aligned to speaking and writing. The continued expected outcome of this team is planning an intense focus on speaking and writing using academic language so that the explicit incorporation of academic 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information language can be embedded in classroom practice both during the regular school day and as the main area of focus in our Title III After School Program (supplemental instruction). The English Language Learners we are inviting to our After School ENL Program for supplemental instruction are students in grades 1-5. Students will be grouped into five classes by grade level bands in order to accommodate similar levels of English Language Proficiency as determined by 2018 NYSESLAT assessment data. The four groups consist of: Students in Grades 4 and 5 at the Transitioning and Expanding levels Students in Grades 4 and 5 at the Entering and Emerging levels (newcomers) Students in Grades 2 and 3 at the Transitioning and Expanding levels Students in Grade 2 and 3 at the Entering and Emerging levels (newcomers) All students in Grade 1 Our Title III After School Program will be taught in English by our ENL teachers while the online program, Imagine Learning, will be available to all students in their home language. Our program will run Wednesdays and Thursdays from February 2019 through May 2019. The total number of sessions will be 15. We anticipate having a total of five classes in this program. Each class will be taught by a licensed ENL teacher who is familiar with the best instructional strategies for developing the reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills of English language proficiency. Planning will take place bi-weekly and collaboratively by the ENL teachers during their professional work time on Tuesday afternoons. A supervisor will run this supplemental program to ensure the needs of all students are being met. She will provide training and professional development to the teachers working the program. She will also facilitate the use of data analysis and data management as well as the usage of appropriate instructional materials. She will also maintain all records in her office in a Title III file including student attendance and program notification in parents' preferred languages. The supervisor of the Title III program is the only on-site supervisor and will be paid using Tax Levy Funding. Students attending the program will have the opportunity to engage in data-driven, targeted literacy instruction using a combination of the online literacy program, Imagine Learning and the Common Core aligned literacy program titled, "TEAM: Teaching ELLs for Academic Language Mastery". A focus for the teachers will be to include scaffolds that support the use of academic language in speaking and writing for all students across theme-based texts and across genres. The types of materials we will be using in this program will support our students learning in a rigorous way. These programs were purchased with both Title III LEP and Title III Immigrant Funds to be used explicitly for our Title III After School Program. "TEAM" is designed for English Language Learners to engage in the four language domains. It uses differentiated, thematically based texts. Imagine Learning provides an individualized and scaffolded learning experience for students by developing their English language acquisition using the support of the home language. Data reports are provided to teachers on a weekly basis focusing on the Instructional Core Focus areas (comprehension, phonics, vocabulary, fluency and phonemic awareness). Teachers will instructional scaffolding without compromising the content the students need to grasp and the language they need to be exposed to first-hand. Some of the other materials we will make use of are the “Language Power" reading and writing program, and the “Text Talk” vocabulary program as well as, a NYSESLAT prep program, towards the end of the after school program for NYSESLAT exam preparation. 3  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: English Language Learners are a growing population in our school (12% in 2014-2015 to 15.5% 2015-2016 to 17% in 2017-2018), and therefore, nearly every teacher in our building is a teacher of ELLs and/or former ELLs. We believe it remains imperative we provide both our Common Branch classroom teachers and our ENL teachers with professional learning opportunities focused on increasing learning in literacy and language for all ELLs in their classroom (as per CR part 154.2 and Continuing Teacher and Leader Education Law: 15% of 100 hours for Common Branch Teachers and 50% of 100 hours for ESL Teachers). As of September 2018, we will have six full time ENL teachers and one teacher who is teaching under her Common Branch license, but also maintains an ENL license and provides full-time ENL instruction to her current and former ELLs. We anticipate having five of these teachers teach the Title III After School Program requiring specific professional development opportunities for these teachers aligned to the main work and focus of the Title III program. For these teachers specifically, Webinars and Videos (of no cost) will be used to increase their knowledge and understanding of Advanced Literacy during Tuesday afternoons (Professional Learning Time – no per session cost). Additionally, similar to last school year, our ENL teachers will continually attend professional learning opportunities facilitated by the Brooklyn South Field Support Center, and will turn-key the information to both their ENL colleagues (taking part in the Title III After School Program) and to classroom teachers during Professional Learning time on Monday afternoons. The focus for these sessions will be providing newcomer and beginner ELLs with ongoing opportunities to engage in close reading while attending to the academic language found in content-rich texts. Through the Professional Development provided out-of-our building, our ENL teachers will increase their knowledge and understanding of best practices for co-teaching and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. Additionally, teachers will use the information they are receiving to make ongoing adaptations and accommodations to their Journeys units for their ELLs. We will also send our ENL teachers to a minimum of one PD session per month offered by the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support to share with classroom teachers. Finally, while the program is in session from February through May, the teachers involved in our Title III After-School Program will meet to examine and analyze student work in order to plan and differentiate instruction aligned to the CCLS and the demands of the 2019 NYSESLAT. PD sessions will be facilitated by the assistant principal (supervisor of the Title III program). Records, including professional development agendas and teacher attendance sheets (including time, date, location and focus), will be maintained by the assistant principal in a Title III file in her office. 4  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: We utilize some of our Title III Program Sessions to focus on providing the parents of our English Language Learners with ongoing opportunities to: -strengthen their English proficiency -receive information about school programs, meetings and other activities -learn about the standards and assessments of their child’s grade - celebrate their diversity -become proficient in our school’s translated website and the New York City Department of Education website -learn instructional strategies to assist their children in acquiring the language Events pertaining to the areas above will be held once per month from January through May. Currently, we are in the process of hiring a new parent coordinator. Once we have hired a new PC, she/he alongside the supervisor of the Title III program, will provide parents of ELLs with translated invitations to share with them the events taking place. Additional funds (up to $1000) will be put aside for interpretation services for the parents who attend these sessions, as well as our Family Fun Night in May. Records will be maintained by the assistant principal in a Title III file in her office including parent attendance sheets, invitations in parents' preferred languages, and agendas of the parent engagement activities. The calendar of events and dates is as follows: • January – parents will receive information about the Title III After School Program and PS 204’s website, including how to access all the pages and translate writing into native language • February – parents and children will celebrate diversity, traditions, and heritage with a multicultural after-school celebration • March – parents will take part in learning about the NYSESLAT, as well as, the NYS ELA and Mathematics exams, including how to best support their children • May – parents will attend a Literacy and Language Celebration in their child’s classroom 5 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 20 School Name Vince Lombardi Elementary School Borough Brooklyn School Number 204 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Nancy Tomasuolo Coach Laura Bonomolo ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Caterina Terruso Teacher/Subject Area Alexandra Cagliostro Teacher/Subject Area Rita Grech Related-Service Provider Caroline Danisi Superintendent N/A Assistant Principal Michele Bennett Coach N/A School Counselor Elizabeth Hickey Parent Melissa Scarpaci Parent Coordinator Jody Logosso Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) Agnes Bolski C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 4 6 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 4 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1140 7 Total number of ELLs 189 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 16.58%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Chinese If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. CH School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2016-2017 K 1 1 1 2 0 3 0 4 0 0 1 0 1 TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 2 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use a variety of formative and curriculum-embedded assessments to guide our planning and instruction for our English Language Learners. They are organized into the following subject areas: Reading (decoding, comprehension, fluency, accuracy): As a school, we use the Teachers College Reading Assessment for all students in grades Kindergarten through five. A student's ability to understand Concept of Print, identify letters and sounds, read basic sight words, and read with accuracy, comprehension (literal and inferential), and fluency is assessed at three different points of the school year. Students in the lower grades, as well as English Language Learners who are new admits, receive all components of the TC Reading Assessment, whereas, students in the upper grades, and/or students reading at a Level D or above, receive the reading portion (accuracy, 8  fluency, comprehension) of the assessment only. Teachers of ELLs also use the Fundations assessment which provide them more detailed data regarding a student's ability to identify sounds (including blends and digraphs) and to read with fluency. Students' instructional reading levels are used for guided reading instruction and their independent reading levels are used for students to read "just right" books during independent reading. At the end of each Journey unit of study, readers in grades two through five are administered benchmark assessments that provide teachers with data associated with both reading comprehension and skills-application. Throughout each unit of study students are also administered vocabulary, grammar and word work assessments that teachers use to plan for word work and writing mini lessons. Writing: Throughout the year we assess our students' writing in each of the standards-based genres: informational, narrative, and opinion using baseline assessments at the start of each of our Journeys' Literacy units of study and a culminating writing piece at the end of each unit (approximately every 6 weeks). Teachers apply the NYSESLAT writing rubrics, as well as, the writing progressions to their students' writing with the purpose of guiding small group instruction so that students are specifically taught the skills they require to move levels. This year we are color-coding the progressions and using student-friendly "I can" statements so that students self- and peer-assess their writing, as well. Mathematics: Students are assessed in mathematics at the end of each math unit. All teachers, and specifically ENL teachers, analyze answers to word problems to guide instruction for their students. Based on scores (using up to a 3 point open-ended/short response rubric), teachers will assist students in developing mathematical vocabulary, explanations, and arguments. All teachers in our school use a variety of formative assessments throughout their school day that enable them to quickly and accurately adjust their instruction to meet their students' needs. These include exit slips, dry erase boards, "show what you know," surveys, turn and talks, and observation/circulation during partnership and small group work. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The following structures are in place to plan, administer and score the assessments outlined in question one: 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs by measuring student progress from year to year. We pay special attention to NYSESLAT scores because they provide a break-down by language modality and we compare the data to data from the year prior. Additionally, we use other formal and informal assessments such as the Journeys Comprehensive Screening Assessment, Journeys Diagnostic Reading Assessment and ongoing end-of-unit assessments. We use rubrics to assess listening, speaking, and writing skills. We also use running records to assess reading accuracy and fluency. We have worked to create our own ENL Progress Report, which our ENL teachers complete for each student at the end of each marking period. This helps us to monitor growth as we identify student strengths and areas in need of improvement and communicate this information to parents. Based on student progress, we make curricular decisions. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? After summative data has been gathered, several structures are in place to address the necessary interventions we provide students. Interventions may be those provided by the classroom teacher, an AIS teacher (Academic Intervention Services), or an ENL teacher during integrated and/or stand-alone instruction. Teachers and administrators meets monthly to discuss concerns, next steps, targeted interventions, and progress made for our English Language Learners. 9  Planning is integral to addressing interventions after the summative data has been gathered. At the start of the school year, all classroom teachers and ENL teachers are provided a report detailing their students' performance on the NYSESLAT. This report provides teachers with each student's total scale score, overall proficiency level, and scale scores by modality (ranging from 30-90). This information provides teachers with an understanding of the students' English Language development, as well as, their relative strengths and weaknesses. The assistant principal of the ELL department gathers and disseminates this data for the teachers. In addition to the scaffolds, differentiation and multiple points of entry that are used by teachers when planning instruction across content areas, students are also targeted with the specific type of intervention they require. For example, if a student scores as the Expanding level, but the relative weakness is writing, the ENL and classroom teacher will place the student in a writing group providing that student with the specific skills and strategies he or she requires. If a student scores at the Commanding level and the relative weakness is reading, it is likely that Academic Intervention Services will be provided to address the student's reading needs. For students who are long-term ELLs and continue to demonstrate significant significant reading and writing deficiencies, small group decoding intervention will take place using programs such as SPIRE and Fundations. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school uses data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework for grades K-5 by first assessing all ELLs with a formal diagnostic assessment to attain a baseline level. Once a baseline level is attained (i.e. TC Reading Level, Journey Comprehensive Screening Assessment Level), students are frequently assessed to determine whether or not progress is being made at an appropriate rate. Students who are identified as not making the expected rate of academic progress as compared to peers receive Tier I instruction in their classrooms specifically tailored to support their development of language, use of strategies, and integration of reading and writing support inside content areas. Guided reading and other forms of differentiated instruction (such as the Go Math Tiers, the Journeys’ leveled readers and leveled scaffolding support systems, Phonics differentiation, etc.) are incorporated into the students’ daily classroom instruction. If our ELLs are still in need of additional support, we utilize Tier II RtI in the form of pull-out Literacy Academic Intervention Services by our AIS providers. This enables our students to receive extra targeted small-group instruction geared towards their specific weaknesses and areas of need. If students still required additional intervention based on inadequate progress, we provide Tier III RtI for these most struggling ELLs, which means there is one teacher teaching up to three students focusing on building remedial skills using a combination of strategies targeted to the needs of ELLs and SWDs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The two main outcome assessments that we use to evaluate and inform our ELL programs include the NYSITELL for our kindergarten and newcomer students and the NYSESLAT for our current English Language Learners. We are awaiting the results of the 2017 NYSESLAT to analyze and disseminate our data. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Prior to the start of the school year, once we have received the results of both the NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT, the assistant principal creates Excel spreadsheets, using the data provided by the New York State Education Department detailing the results of the NYSESLAT for each student. At the start of the school year, each teacher (both the current teacher and the previous teacher) is made aware of the data through the packets they receive from the assistant principal. Based on data trends (i.e. consistent and patterned strengths and weaknesses), we make adjustments to our programs. Curricular adjustments we are making for this upcoming school year will target both reading and mathematics. For example, based on a combination of NYSESLAT reading modality data from 2016 and Spring 2017 Teachers College Reading 0  Assessment data, we are noticing that our students are demonstrating weaknesses in the application of reading skills in their own texts. We are, therefore, adjusting our Journeys curriculum to include fewer re-reads and graphic organizers related to the class anchor texts and more reading of independent and/or guided reading texts to build students' abilities to apply and transfer reading skills and develop their reading stamina. Based on data trends in mathematics (using state math assessments and Go Math End of Unit assessments) we are noticing that our students (specifically our ELLs) are stronger in the areas of mathematical computation, number sense and fluency but struggle in receiving a "full score" when solving word problems. Their areas of difficulty include comprehending the question and providing sequenced mathematical explanations. We are, therefore, honing in on mathematical vocabulary, partnership conversations and developing student-friendly success criteria for this school year. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction is delivered in our ENL program for our ELLs as per CR Part 154.2 in the following ways: Each of our six ENL teachers teaches a total of five periods per day. We have three teachers who teach in self-contained ENL classrooms (2nd, 3rd, and 4th grades) and three teachers who teach a combination of standalone and integrated ENL instruction (grades K-5). We also have two Chinese bilingual teachers who teach kindergarten and first graders. • We have strategically placed our kindergarten ELLs in four classes with approximately six ELLs in each class (after creating a Chinese Transitional Bilingual Education (TBE) class of 25 students). This enables our kindergarten ENL teacher to conduct integrated instructional services for these students according to the guidelines and mandates of CR Part 154.2 (2-4 periods per week based on level). This also enables our ENL teacher to provide standalone services to her entering, emerging, and transitioning students from these classrooms for the designated number of minutes in accordance to CR Part 154.2 (2-4 periods per week). • Our first grade ELLs have been placed in four classes. One class is a Chinese TBE class of approximately 25 students. The other three first grade classes contain approximately 6 heterogeneously grouped ELLs in each class. One of our ENL teachers conducts both integrated and standalone ENL instruction in accordance with CR Part 154.2 (2-4 periods standalone, 2-4 periods integrated depending on proficiency level). • Most of our second, third and fourth grade current and former ELLs have been placed in self-contained, heterogeneously grouped ENL classrooms taught by full-time ENL teachers. If we have more students than the self-contained class can accommodate, we place the students in general education classes and service them by one of our ENL integrated/stand-alone teachers accordingly. • Our fifth grade ELLs have been distributed across three heterogeneously grouped fifth grade classrooms (ranging from emerging to former in each group). These students are provided standalone and integrated instruction according to their proficiency level mandates as per CR Part 154.2 by one of our ENL teachers. 1  • Our special education students are serviced in the Least Restrictive Environment in accordance to their IEPs in grades K-5 (12:1:1 and ICT classrooms). These students are taught using the standalone and integrated models of instruction as per CR Part 154.2 and their proficiency level mandates. b. TBE program. If applicable. We currently have two Chinese TBE programs at our school; a kindergarten program and a first grade program. Our TBE programs are taught by Mandarin speaking teachers holding a common branch license. Both teachers are currently in the process of receiving a bilingual extension (Brooklyn College, Queens College). The students in our TBE classes are also serviced by our licensed ENL teacher for both stand-alone and integrated instruction as per the ENL requirements of CR Part 154.2. In order to meet the requirements of CR Part 154. 2 for bilingual education, the following programming takes place weekly: - Four Chinese Language Arts (Home Language Arts) classes - Minimum of two bilingual content area subjects (mathematics and science) for Entering and Emerging students and a minimum of one bilingual content area subjects (mathematics) for Transitioning and Expanding students -360 minutes of ENL instruction (both Stand-alone and Integrated) for Entering and Emerging students -180 minutes of ENL instruction (Integrated only) for Transitioning and Expanding students c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We use STARS Classroom as a means to ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model. In our Freestanding ENL program model, instructional minutes are delivered as follows: • For students at the entering and emerging levels, they receive 4 periods of standalone ENL instruction and 4 periods of integrated ENL instruction for a total of 8 periods per week. The integrated ENL instruction they receive in the classroom is for ENL/ELA instruction. • For students at the transitioning level, they receive 2 periods of standalone ENL instruction and 2 periods of integrated ENL instruction in the areas of ENL/ELA for a total of 4 periods per week. There is the flexibility with this group to fully service them with integrated ENL instruction for four periods per week rather than break their instruction up into 2 periods standalone/2 periods integrated. • For students at the expanding level, they do not receive any standalone ENL, but rather, are fully serviced with integrated ENL instruction in either ELA or in a content area (depending upon the recommendation of the classroom teachers) for 4 periods per week. • For our former ELLs, we service them for two years following a score of commanding on the NYSESLAT or following a score of Advanced on the NYSESLAT with a level 3 or 4 on the NYS ELA exam. They are provided with two periods of integrated ENL in either ELA or in a content area for two periods per week. In our Chinese TBE program model, instructional minutes are delivered in the same manner as they are for our Freestanding ENL program (combination of stand-alone and integrated) and are taught by one of our licensed ENL teachers. 2  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content is delivered in our ENL model to assist students in meeting the demands of the CCLS through the use of non-fiction, expository texts focused on a thematic unit of study (modeled after the current NYSESLAT) in where students are explicitly taught to read, write (narrative, opinion, and informational pieces), listen and discuss non-fiction content building a conceptual understanding of the topic along with the academic vocabulary to support their comprehension of the subject matter. Students read and deconstruct complex text and work to answer text-dependent questions through partnership and small group work (“think, pair, share” and “turn and talk”). ENL teachers teach content in this manner in both the standalone model and the integrated model. ENL teachers use tools such as Total Physical Response, enlarged photographs, maps, articles, and vocabulary cards to scaffold instruction to allow for multiple entry points. They also use sheltered instruction in where there is a clear goal and aim for each lesson and a strong discussion around vocabulary to make the content and language more comprehensible to students. Students in our TBE classes receive similar instructional approaches when core content is delivered to them. A main difference for the students in our TBE classes is the the vast amount of texts, charts, and other materials that are accessible to them in Chinese. Our TBE classes are print-rich in both English and Chinese. Language development is also fostered with families as we send home fiction and non-fiction texts and trade books in both English and Chinese. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year by doing a needs assessment of our ELL caseload. Through the needs assessment, we determine which students in grades 3, 4 and 5 need to have the NYS Math and NYS Science tests administered in their native languages. For those students, we make sure they receive both an English and an alternative language edition of the test simultaneously. This is available in Spanish, Chinese, Russian, Haitian Creole and Korean. If we have students who need assessments in languages other than these, we seek out bilingual staff members or hire translators from a Department of Education contracted vendor so they can provide oral, direct translation/interpretation of the English edition of these tests. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We differentiate instruction for ELL subgroups in the following ways: a. When we have Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE), we implement a program designed to maximize their learning by taking into consideration the student’s current level of academic performance (using recent assessments including the LENS in their home language, when applicable). After assessing the student’s current skill levels, instruction is tailored to fill in the language regression gap that was caused by interrupted schooling. The ENL teachers work with the classroom teachers and the student to systematically build foundational language skills. b. For newcomer ELLs who have been in US schools for fewer than three years, we implement a program of study that addresses their specific needs. We work to establish a language foundation through vocabulary-building activities that incorporate listening and speaking. We model correct English language usage and expose students to appropriately leveled literacy materials. We also incorporate a strong emphasis on beginner phonics skills that will lead to further developments in reading and writing (through the Fundations program). We use the Journeys literacy program and incorporate the use of ELL 3  text sets, multiple entry points, frontloaded vocabulary and the recommended ELL scaffolds supports into daily instruction. Additionally, since students who have been in the country for one year or more are required to take the NYS ELA exam, we teach our upper grade students comprehension strategies to support their ability to correctly answer multiple choice and constructed response questions after reading grade level passages. c. For developing ELLs who have been receiving service for 4 – 6 years, we analyze NYSESLAT data, as well as, the data from classroom assessments. In our data analysis, we typically find that our students perform better on listening and speaking tasks than on reading and writing tasks. As a result, we provide instruction to remediate this deficiency. Students are engaged in lessons that are designed to teach reading and writing strategies for both informational and literary texts and tasks and receive these strategies by both their ENL teacher and their classroom teacher through various scaffolds and differentiated small group instruction. We also provide these students with Academic Intervention Services (AIS) periods to assist them in both the achievement of grade level standards and the ability to demonstrate English proficiency. d. For long term ELLS who have completed six years of ENL instruction, we again analyze the results of their NYSESLAT and classroom assessments to determine their strengths and areas in need of improvement. We then tailor a program using small group instruction to meet their instructional needs. We provide these students with AIS and make certain they are receiving the proper level of supports to make the necessary progress. e. For our former ELLs, we provide them with two years of integrated support in ELA or in a content area by an ESL teacher for two periods per week. We look at the vast array of assessments they take to determine whether they are meeting grade level standards or are falling below grade level standards. For former ELLs who are not meeting grade level standards, we provide them the opportunity to receive AIS in literacy and/or math. We also make certain they have the appropriate testing accommodations for the two years after they score commanding on the NYSESLAT (separate location, extended time, use of bilingual glossaries, and simultaneous use of English and alternative language test additions). 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? For our ELLs who have been identified as having special needs, we follow IEP mandates to ensure students’ learning goals are met. Our special education teachers, general education teachers and ESL teachers collaborate to design effective instructional programs for these students so that their English language skills improve while their disabilities are taken into consideration. They use research based strategies, such as scaffolding, to meet ELL-SWDs where they are and build upon existing skill sets. They also design instructional activities to increase vocabulary development, improve listening skills, and refine oral and written language abilities. They do this while ensuring that ELL-SWDs have access to academic content areas (pushing-in to content area instruction in the classroom) while working to accelerate their English language development. Teachers use the appropriate grade level and skill level curricular materials including, Go Math, Journeys, SPIRE, and On Our Way to English. In addition, they use an abundance of supplementary materials such as fiction and non-fiction big books, enlarged posters/photographs containing diagrams, maps, graphs, etc., and the SmartBoard and/or Elmo document camera. We also have materials in our students' native language available to teachers and students, such as bilingual dictionaries, trade books, fictional literature, and Imagine Learning which is a computer-based program that translates directions, questions and information in students' native languages. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. ELLs in both ICT and 12:1:1 special education programs receive ENL Standalone instruction alongside their general education peers based on their proficiency level. They also receive ENL Integrated instruction in their special education classes so that the ENL teacher and special education teacher can collaborate and plan to ensure that students’ 4  disabilities are taken into careful consideration. We make certain to be very strategic with both forms of instruction to make certain that there is still time throughout the school day for the other IEP-mandated pull-out services of Speech/Language, OT, PT, and/or APE to take place. Monitoring that students receive services in the least restrictive environment is crucial and we accomplish this by strictly adhering to IEP guidelines. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We have targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA and math, specifically for those ELLs who have been receiving services for two or more years but who are still scoring at the Level 1 or low Level 2 range in their state assessments and/or classroom assessments. One of our approaches to intervention is a push-in model where AIS providers (ELA and math) come into the general education classroom and work with small groups of students to provide instruction tailored to meet their learning needs. The other approach is a pull-out model, where AIS providers work with groups of students in a separate setting to provide instruction tailored to meet their learning needs. These programs are offered in English. Students are assessed using the Teachers College Reading Assessments, and end-of-unit Journeys and Go Math Assessments to determine those needs and lessons are developed by the providers. Academic Interventions Services are provided in English and utilize the same curricular materials and resources as the classroom teacher, but at the level that is most appropriate for the student as determined by ongoing assessments. We are currently implementing the Journeys and Go Math Curricula in Grades K-5. Both programs have structures and materials for targeted intervention built into the program. Our AIS providers make use of these structures and materials in their small group instruction. Materials, such as trade books, and reference materials, such as bilingual dictionaries and math reference guides, are used in the student's native language. Leveled texts sets are used for small group instruction and are specific to the skills in which many of our ELLs struggle. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? After careful consideration of several different Common Core aligned curricula, our Instructional Team selected the literacy program, Journeys, two years ago. As a school community, we determined that the Journeys program is aligned to our core beliefs as to how students learn best. Journeys provides our students the opportunity to engage in the reading of complex texts with appropriate scaffolding and supports provided by their teachers using various materials and resources. Leveled texts with a strong emphasis on small group instruction (especially for ELLs) is at the crux of this program and something we determined to be a great need for our school community. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A - we will be continuing with our TBE program 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs, both curricular and extra curricular, such as art, music, physical education, dance, band and chorus. Parents are consistently notified about all programs in their native languages. We have a community-based NIA after-school program that provides homework help and enrichment activities for our students, many of whom are ELLs. We also invite our current ELLs and former ELLs (within two years) to participate in our Saturday Title III program, which provides supplemental language and literacy instruction. We will be continuing with our TheatreMoves program which is an annual 12 week residency program for our ELLs. This program takes place during the school day and affords our ELLs the opportunity to engage in activities that foster teamwork, social skills, speaking with expression, Total Physical Response (the physicalization of language), and listening skills. 5  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We use a variety of instructional programs and materials to support our ELLs. The programs we use throughout the building include the Journeys literacy program, Fundations, Go Math, leveled libraries, and shared reading charts, posters and texts. Every classroom is equipped with a SmartBoard and all teachers use the SmartBoard to provide visual and auditory support during both math and literacy instruction as Go Math and Journeys have strong technology components for teachers to utilize. The programs we use specifically for ELLs are “Language Power,” “On Our Way to English,” and the Journeys ELL text sets. Also, beginning in 2014 we purchased over 70 Ipads, and as of today, we have grown the number of Ipads we have in our building to over 400. Every ELL has daily access to an Ipad so that he/she may interact with the Imagine Learning program which provides strategic first language support in the languages of our ELLs. We found that this program provides our ELLs with language and literacy software that is personalized, meaningful, and engaging, and provides our teachers with the ability to consistently identify students who need more help and the specific skills in which they require more work. Students are able to build their skills (i.e. letters to sounds to words, etc.), receive feedback that helps them better answer strategy-based questions, and experience peer-modeling as a means of having concepts more clearly illustrated to them. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In both our ENL program and TBE program, home language support is delivered through the use of bilingual classroom libraries and the Imagine Learning Program. In our TBE classrooms, our TBE teacher provides language support and assessment to her students throughout the day. Students are also encouraged to speak and write in their native language while developing English language skills in all of our programs. Being that we only have a kindergarten and first grade TBE program, we have not begun to administer the Chinese Reading Test to our students as of yet. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We ensure all required services and resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels by being very careful to appropriately match materials to each of our student groups. We do this by ordering materials at a variety of difficulty levels so that all needs may be met. When purchasing the Journeys literacy program, we made certain it included ELL text sets for every classroom so that classroom teachers, as well as ENL teachers providing integrated instruction, could utilize the materials. Each classroom received 30 fiction and non-fiction text sets with six texts in each set at varied reading levels. We have appropriate age-level and grade-level materials for students from entering through expanding in all classrooms. Teachers also take advantage of the numerous ELL-based activities, resources and modifications that are available for them on Think Central (connected to both Journeys and Go Math). We make certain to review the NYSESLAT results, as well as, analyze other sources of formal and informal data to make the best determination as to whether the instruction we are providing meets students at their current level of functioning and helps build upon the skills they already possess. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A - Our school does not share a building with another school 6  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Given the change we were able to make this school year by administering the NYSITELL to our current Pre-K students and pre-registered kindergarten students, we have been able to strategically create classes in kindergarten for our incoming ELLs (including a TBE class) and will be able to make certain that our teachers have activities planned to transition these students to kindergarten. Our ENL teachers, Parent Coordinator and Early Childhood/ELL assistant principal are regularly involved in greeting new parents and affording them the opportunity to have their questions and concerns answered as students enroll throughout the school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Being an elementary school, we do not offer any language electives to our students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Ongoing professional development for teachers is a priority at our school. We adhere to the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2 in where 15% of total hours for all teachers is designated to ELL specific professional development and where 50% of total hours for ENL teachers is designated for ELL specific professional development. We will continue to work to meet these mandates by using the professional development time on both Monday and Tuesday afternoons assembling teachers in Professional Learning Communities, grade bands, by teacher need, by teacher request, and ELA/content area (Monday 2:20 - 3:40 PM and Tuesday 3:00 - 3:35 PM, following Parent Engagement). We invite speakers and facilitators from CITE (Center for Integrated Teacher Education) into our school to present relevant and meaningful professional development to all of our teachers and we send our ENL teachers to professional development sessions provided by the Department of English Language Learners and Student Support (DELLSS), as well as, by the district, UFT, and private educational facilitators so that they may turnkey the valuable and pertinent information they learn from these sessions to all teachers of ELLs during our school's designated professional development time. A large focus of the PD we provide for all ELL personnel at the school is dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, best practices for co-teaching, and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs (as per the ELL Policy and Reference Guide). Our pupil personnel secretary attends professional development offered by the Brooklyn South Field Support Center and DELLSS as it becomes available throughout the school year. The assistant principal responsible for ELLs also attends ongoing professional 7  development sessions made available by the Brooklyn South Field Support Office and DELLSS as they become available. Our goal continues to be that our teachers of ELLs and the assistant principal attend a minimum of one professional development session a month outside the school building to turnkey the information learned during their sessions at our Monday PD sessions for both the classroom and content teachers in the school. Our assistant principals. lead teachers, ENL teachers and Curriculum Coach provide ongoing professional development to teachers of ELLs in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. This year, a large portion of our Monday afternoon Professional Development (upwards to 80 minutes each Monday) will be focused on the analysis of student work in mathematics to drive instruction and plan differentated learning activitites taking into consideration multiple entry points (a continuation of prior year's Instructional Focus). This year we will be working with the Core Collaborative and much of the professional development that is provided to teachers will focus on Inquiry Team Work (analysis of math data and instruction), small group instruction (specifically to meet the diverse needs of our ELLs), scaffolding, higher order questioning, and multiple entry points. All of these areas will support teachers in supporting their ELLs as they engage in the CCLS. In addition to the PD provided by our assistant principals, lead teachers, ENL teachers and Curriculum Coach on Monday afternoons, we will offer teachers of ELLs the opportunity to attend outside PD provided by DELLSS and the Brooklyn South Field Support Center. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We keep records of all professional development activities using both attendance sign-in sheets and agendas. When Professional Learning Communities meet (in their grades), they are responsible for keeping recorded notes of what they discussed/focused on, the student work they analyzed, and their next steps. All of these documents are kept in binders in the principal's office. As stated in Question #1, we plan to meet the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2 by utilizing the time on Monday and Tuesday afternoons for teachers of ELLs to receive professional development and by sending our ENL teachers to outside ELL-specific professional development offered by DELLSS, the district, the UFT, and private educational fac Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Beginning at the start of the school year, after the initial parent orientation meeting, families are invited to attend meetings to hear information about the ENL program at PS 204. During this meeting, information is provided regarding the integrated ENL and standalone ENL sessions, academic and curricular programs used by ELLs (Journeys, Imagine Learning, etc.) classroom assessments, program goals, and Common Core Learning Standards. There is also Q&A time provided for families. Interpreters are present to interpret and phone translations are available in languages other than those provided by staff members. Individual meetings are scheduled with families during the allocated parental engagement time on Tuesdays throughout the school year to update families of their child’s progress and areas of need in regards to language acquisition and development. If a family is unable to attend on Tuesdays, phone conferences will be held using the services of the translation and interpretation line. ENL teachers are also available to attend meetings scheduled by the child’s classroom teacher throughout the school year. 8  ENL teachers keep a written record of all annual individual meetings with families (including phone conferences and outreach), as well as, copies of progress reports sent home to families. Forms are distributed by the assistant principal to assist the ENL teachers in keeping a standard record of all meetings and phone conferences that are held with families. At the end of the school year, these records of communication are collected and organized in a binder in the assistant principal’s office. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. At PS 204, we have a very actively involved parent population, which includes our parents of ELLs. Invitations to all meetings and school functions are sent home in languages preferred by parents so they can understand and fully participate. Many of our parents attend monthly PTA meetings, as well as, other school wide events. Parents attend grade performances (music, dancing, theater), Student of the Month and Awards Assemblies, Gift Sharing Assembly, Family Fun Night and the Dance Festival. We hire interpreters to attend all Parent-Teacher Conferences. We also provide ongoing English instruction classes to our parents by our parent coordinator. During the Title III program, we organize specific activities for families of ELLs. We hold an International Food Celebration where families are invited to bring a dish from their country, talk about the dish and share recipes with other families and staff. We host publishing parties and celebrations and we organize trips around New York City to acculturate parents and students with the American culture and traditions through exposure to iconic places. The parent coordinator also organizes workshops for families on Saturday mornings. Some topics she covers are school applications, blue cards, important school documents, the school website and tips to help families support their child’s academic improvement at home. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Nancy Tomasuolo, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 204 School DBN: 20K204 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Nancy Tomasuolo Title Principal Michele Bennett Assistant Principal Jody Logosso Parent Coordinator Caterina Terruso ENL/Bilingual Teacher Melissa Scarpaci Parent Rita Grech Teacher/Subject Area Alexandra Cagliostro Teacher/Subject Area Laura Bonomolo N/A Coach Coach Elizabeth Hickey School Counselor N/A Agnes Bolski N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Teacher/ENL Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 N/A 06/28/17 N/A N/A N/A 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 20K204 School Name: Vince Lombardi School Superintendent: KarinaCostanti The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Nancy Rita Michele Laura Luong Grech Bennett Bonomolo Guidance Counselor ENL Teacher Assistant Principal Curriculum Coach No Yes No No Yes Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. To assess our schools written translation and oral interpretation needs we analyze information from ATS reports (RELC, RHLA, RPOB, RYOS), Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) forms, and blue cards. We also send home the Parent Language Preference Form that was made available on the DOE website so that we may update ATS to indicate the preferences of those families who do not already have this information in ATS. Based on the results we receive from these sources, we create a master list of all languages. This list provides information about the entire school population, as well as, breaking down the data by grade and class. Through close examination of this information, we are able to determine the specific translation and interpretation needs of our school community so parents can be provided with appropriate and timely information in the languages they understand. 2  Through the needs assessment, we determined that approximately 46% of our families prefer communication from the school in a language other than English. Of those families, the top four languages are Chinese (32%), Spanish (12%), Arabic (1.2%) and Russian (.5%). We report these findings annually in the early fall at a school-wide faculty conference and a Leadership Team Meeting. Additionally, at the start of the school year, a memo is generated and distributed to each classroom teacher indicating the parents' language preferences for their class. Using this information, teachers are able to ensure that all written correspondence is sent home to parents in translated versions of the languages the parents can understand. At PS 204 we work hard to fulfill the Chancellor's Regulations A-663 regarding parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services. Signs are posted in the main lobby and throughout the school building in languages parents understand. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral (AR) Arabic (BS) Burmese (CA) Cham (CB) Cebuano 40 0 0 1 (CH) Chinese Any 477 (CN) Cantonese (IT) Italian (MN) Mandarin (NO) English (RU) Russian (SP) Spanish (TU) Turkish (UD) Urdu (UZ) Uzbek 0 1 0 671 9 130 1 2 1 3% 0 0 0.08% 35.78% 0 0.08% 0 50.34% 0.68% 9.75% 0.08% 0.15% 0.08% 32 1 2 0 417 18 1 45 676 9 125 1 4 2 2.4% 0.08% 0.15% 0 31.28% 1.35% 0.08% 3.38% 50.71% 0.68% 9.38% 0.08% 0.3% 0.15% 3  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include Families procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The documents we typically disseminate every year that require translation are: *All DOE generated documents are sent home in languages parents prefer throughout the school year Ongoing *We regularly update our website with all school information, including curricular information, newsletters, grade/class news, trips, school events, etc. *We use the DOE website to download and distribute letters/information that directly comes from the DOE and that has already been translated in preferred languages for families. *Our school's website will automatically translate this information into a parent's preferred language. 4  At the start of the year, we send home hard copies of translated letters and documents of the following: *PS 204 Website Information *School Calendar *School holidays *Welcome Letters *Permission to Walk Home Tear-off September, October, *Cell Phone Policy November We contact the DOE Translation Services (translations@schools.nyc.gov) allowing at least three weeks time for them to make the required translations *Curriculum Night *Picture Day *Spirit Day *Parent Teacher Conference *Safety Protocols *Open School Week As the year continues, we send home translated letters and documents of the following: *After-school/Saturday Programs *Testing Information (dates and programs) *Non-attendance day reminders *Winter events *Winter recess *Performances *Holidays *Promotion in Doubt *February Recess December, January, February We contact the DOE Translation Services (translations@schools.nyc.gov) allowing at least three weeks time for them to make the required translations 5  At the end of the school year, we send home translated letters and documents of the following: *Winter and Spring Recess *Promotion/Retention *Summer School Information *End-of-Year Calendar and Events *Graduation and Moving Up Ceremonies March, April, May, June We contact the DOE Translation Services (translations@schools.nyc.gov) allowing at least three weeks time for them to make the required translations 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? The formal face-to-face meetings we have with parents throughout the school year are: *Ongoing calls to parents from attendance teacher *Ongoing reach-out conversations from guidance counselor to families Ongoing We utilize staff members and/or the DOE Language Line (1-855-249-9103 or 1-800-231-0288) *Parent-Teacher Conferences November, March, May *Curriculum Night September *IEP Meetings Ongoing We hire DOE interpreters to assist staff members for all conferences Staff members serve as interpreters throughout the evening We utilize staff members and/or the DOE Language Line 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. When we are permitted to share information related to a major school emergency, we share the information (typically in the form of a DOE-approved letter) on our translated website and in back-packed letters. We also reach out to the school community via Remind Text blasts, updated school web-site and individual translated phone calls to all families to inform them of changes to the school day (i.e cancellation of after school programs, snow day closures, etc.). 6  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the first faculty conference of the school year, Chancellor's Regulations are reviewed with the entire staff and each staff member is provided the links to the regulations. In so far as Chancellor's Regulations A-663, which provides information regarding the procedures "for ensuring that Limited English Speaking parents are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education," all staff members are provided with the tools, information and resources they need to ensure that parents who require translation and interpretation may receive what they require. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) As per the Chancellor's Regulations A-663, our school fulfills parental notification requirements and interpretation services by having all above notification requirements posted and located at the appropriately designated areas in the nine most common primary languages other than English spoken by persons living in NYC. In the main entrance area, we post a sign in each of the covered languages indicating the availability of interpretation services. Additionally, we distribute a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities to families which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In order to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services, we survey parents at our each of our Parent Teacher Conferences (November, March, May). In addition, on Saturday mornings, we provide ongoing opportunities for the parents of our ELLs (inclusive of all cultures and languages) who attend our Title III Saturday Program to attend various types of sessions, including feedback sessions in where they can share with us their thoughts, questions, concerns and/or ideas as to how their child is making progress in English language acquisition through our ENL program. 7 
