 21K212 School Name: P.S. 212 LADY DEBORAH MOODY Principal: RINA HORNE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: P.S. 212: Lady Deborah Moody 21K212 332100010212 Pre K- 5 School Number (DBN): 87 Bay 49 th Street Brooklyn, N.Y. 11218 718-266-4841 718-266-7080 Phone Number: Fax: Rina Horne rhorne@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Rina Horne Maria Belkadi Randi Garay MariaBelkadi Dina Lam none Stephanie Romo District Information Geographical District: 21 Superintendent’s Office Address: Isabel Dimola Superintendent: 1401 Emmons Avenue Brooklyn, NY 11235 Idimola@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-648-0209 Phone Number: Brooklyn FSC: 718-648-2165 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Mauriciere DeGovia Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89 th Street. Brooklyn NY 11209 Mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-648-0209 Phone Number: 718-648-2165 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Rina Horne Maria Belkadi Randi Garay Dina Lam Sharon Dror Nicole Eckert ToniannMurray *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Mallory Figueroa SamanthaDay Dina Lam Caroline Moy Maura Lewinger Noelle Pellett Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission statement: We at P.S. 212, believe that every child has the right to achieve his or her greatest potential. We are committed to providing all students with opportunities and supports to attain the highest standards and expectations for learning   within a safe and nurturing environment. To this end, our school community will support our students' efforts to become productive, literate, and responsible citizens. Vision: We see our school as a community that shares values and encompasses the beliefs of those with diverse backgrounds. Our school community is a place where all members including students, staff and parents empower and support one another. Our shared vision is that children of our school community grow to possess college and career readiness skills and become responsible, progressive, and adaptable adults. The members will develop strong decision making skills, critical thinking skills and the ability to communicate effectively. They will become active participants and leaders in our school community with long term goals, high self-esteem, and respect for themselves and the world around them. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Public school 212 is located in the Gravesend community of South Brooklyn. P.S 212 is situated among two-family houses and near two middle-income cooperatives. However, many of our students reside in low-income housing just about five blocks from our school. This Pre-K to fifth grade school serves a population of approximately 725 students from culturally diverse backgrounds. The school building is approximately 90 years old, contains five floors and is a school that embraces the arts. Our building is fully utilized. The current breakdown of classes are as follows: 3 Full day Pre-K classes 5 Kindergarten classes 5 First grade & 1 first and second grade bridge classes 5 Second grade classes 5 Third grade classes 4 Fourth grades 4 Fifth grade classes We offer students seven cluster programs 1 Visual Arts Class 0  1 Dance 1 Science 1 Technology 1 Literacy/Library 2 Physical Education Our visual arts and dance programs enhance our student’s creativity and theatrical abilities, which in turn, builds positive self-esteem and leadership abilities. They offer upper grade club programs during and after the school day. Our literacy through dance program encourages students to learn about various types of movement, as well as the history of dance. Our musical theater program introduces children into the world of dramatic arts while also incorporating vocal including chorus and singing. Both of these programs increase self-esteem, encourage teamwork as well as leadership skills. Cultural diversity is explored and strong foundations of respect for all are established! We plan to offer a variety of after school club programs in the fall which include: Sports, Technology, Yoga , STEM Cheer, Chorus, Visual and Performing Arts. Academic After School will be offered for students in all grades including our ELL and Special Education populations. We plan to also include students in remedial and enrichment Saturday Programs and After School Programs. One of our primary objectives is to bridge the gap of the performance index of the subgroups within the building. We are committed to improve literacy and math by implementing coherent and engaging curriculum that is aligned to the common core learning standards. Teachers promote educational success through flexible groups, scaffolding instruction, differentiated tasks and using data to drive instruction. In addition academic intervention services support the learning needs of our sub-groups. It is imperative to increase the number of students scoring level 3 and 4 and decrease the number of student scoring a level 1. Level one students should improve to advance high-level 2’s. Student attendance which is at approximately 92.9 % for the year and punctuality must be monitored to ensure consistency which will result in maximum access to rigorous, engagement and coherent practices. Improving home-school relationships in support of students’ educational and social emotional needs is a priority. 1  In addition, P.S 212 is dedicated to the expectation that parents are partners. We are developing a culture for our school community that communicates high expectations for students and families, Increasing student achievement, and improving social-emotional skills will reflect this foundation of support. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The student body includes approximately 20% English Language Learners and 23% Special Education Students. These breakdowns include 7 ICT classes and a self-contained 12:1:1 class on each of the grades K-5, including two on grade 4. There is also an ENL program, which serves approximately 125 English Language Learners. Based on 2018 ELA state exam data approximately 160 Black and Hispanic students performed at the following levels of proficiency: We tested 122 Hispanic students on the 2018 ELA exam. Of those tested, 31% scored at level 1, 34% scored at level 2, 26% scored at level 3, and 8% scored at level 4. We tested 42 Black students on the 2018 ELA exam. Of the students tested: 36% scored at level 1, 38% scored at level 2, 21% scored at level 3, and 5% scored at level 4. Based on 2018 Math exam data approximately 160 black and Hispanic students performed at the following levels of proficiency: We tested 125 Hispanic students on the Math exam. Of those students tested, 41% scored at a level 1, 26% scored at a level 2, 26% scored at a level 3, and 6% scored at a level 4. We tested 41 black students on the 2018 Math exam. Of those students tested, 37% scored at a level 1, 29% scored at a level 2, 27% scored at a level 3, and 7% scored at a level 4. Grades 3-5 Breakdown for students with specific needs There were 87 special education students who took the 2018 ELA exam ,11 of which are also ELLs.  Of the 87 students with disabilities, who took the ELA exam, 53% scored at level 1, 36% scored at level 2, 9% scored at level 3, and 2% scored at level 4.   There were 86 students with disabilities who took the 2018 Math exam. Of those students, 62% scored at level1, 26% scored at level 2, 10% scored at level 3, and 2% scored at level 4. Approximately 85% of Students in special education while showing growth in Math and ELA units of study designed by our school are still performing below the standards for their grade level. Student attendance averaged 92.1% for the 2017-18 school year but 18% of students are chronically absent and average less than 80% attendance for the year. These students are mostly promotion in doubt. Our special education department included school assessment team comprised of: 1 Full-time, Bilingual (Spanish) School Psychologist 1 Part-time Bilingual (Cantonese) School Psychologist 1 Part-time, bilingual (Spanish) Social Worker 1 Part-time Social Worker 1 Full-time Guidance Counselor 2 Full-time OT (1- Spanish) and 1 Part-Time OT (Russian) 1 Part-Time PT (Chinese) 2  1 Part-Time Adaptive Physical Education Teacher 5 Full-time Speech Teachers and 1 part time Speech Teacher 1 Full-time SETTS teacher (Spanish) 1 Full-time IEP teacher 1 Bilingual, family assistant (Russian) Academic Intervention Services Team consists of: 1 AIS ELA/ Math teacher (lower grade) 1 Math AIS Teacher (upper grade) 1 Literacy AIS teacher (upper grade) 1 SETTS 1 IEP Teacher 1 Data Specialist 3 ESL teachers, 1 is bilingual in Russian 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. One of our primary objectives is to bridge the gap of the performance index of the subgroups within the building. We are committed to improve literacy and math by implementing coherent and engaging curriculum that is aligned to the common core learning standards. In addition, P.S. 212 is dedicated to the expectation that "parents are partners". We are developing a culture for our school community that communicates high expectations for students and families by Increasing student achievement, and improving social-emotional skills will reflect this foundation of support. In the past year, our school has demonstrated the most progress in the area of rigorous instruction. According to the School Quality Guide 2017-18 our score of 3.96 on achievement metrix which is .71 + in comparison to the city average and .33 as compared to the district average. We hope that by introducing a schoolwide intervention online system called: IREADY math and ELA our students and parents will have a deeper understanding of the grade level standards. We have also introduced a new mathematics CORE program called Envision math 2.O from Pearson as well as a content area subject called Amplified Science. The 2018 ELA state data for grades 3-5 showed a 3% increase in overall student proficiency and over 15% since 2014. In math, we are pleased that this year our students made 15% gain in overall proficiency and 50% of our students are meeting or exceeding the state standard. 16% of Ells were proficient in ELA which is smilar to the previous year. In 3  math, 38% of ELLs were proficient which is an increase of 4% from the previous year. In 2018, economically disadvantaged students showed a 14% increase in proficiency from the year before. We look forward to strengthening our curriculum, pedagogy and support programs so that all students can achieve! 4  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 21K212 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 699 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 75 75 26 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 30 25 23 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 82.7% % Reduced Lunch 18.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 36.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 16.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 42.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 90% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH YES YSH YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 65 63 91.9% 3.0% 23.5% 11.9% 33.9% 1.1% 2 0% 8.6 50.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO YES N/A YES YES NO YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Throughout the year, each grade level follows units of study that align to the three different text types (narrative, opinion, informational) as demanded by the Common Core Learning Standards. Each unit of study, designed by teachers, includes a pre-assessment, embedded assessments and a culminating assessment. The data of these assessments are analyzed by teacher teams with a looking at student work and data protocol to help drive instruction and monitor growth throughout the unit by in-class formative assessments and by submitting a grade sheet that indicates the percentage of growth of each student and subgroups within the unit. Through the data collection of each unit of study and the ELA state exam, it is shown that a percentage of students do make adequate growth, although students from specific subgroups (FELLs, ELLs and Ells with disabilities ) require and need additional scaffolds and supports in order to demonstrate 1 year of progress or to reach grade level standards as measured by the Literacy CCLS. Through discussions that occur during teacher team meetings and ADVANCE data, it is evident that some teachers are grappling with the necessary instructional moves to scaffold and support all learners in order to progress 1 level or to grade level standard. Although the data indicates that subgroups such as, ELLs and SWDs, students have made slight increases towards meeting the grade level standard on the ELA state exam, data demonstrates that the increase is not consistent amongst all grades. Data for Targeted Subgroups: ELL and SWD's F & P Reading Levels- Grades K-5 Fountas and Pinnell Reading Level data overall for SWDs for the 2017-18 school year showed that 141 of SWDs moved an average of 3.5 reading levels throughout the school year. In addition, the data shows that 80% of SWDs are presently reading below grade level standards. Student attendance averaged 92% for the 2017-19 school year but 18% of students are chronically absent and average less than 80% attendance for the year. State exam data for ELL students shows that 16% of students were proficient in ELA and slightly decreased from the year before. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 6  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Through rigorous, Common-Core aligned instruction, by June 2019, 75% of targeted Level 1 students (ELL/SWD/BLACK and/or Hispanic) will meet their individual learning goals in ELA as measured by pre-post Unit-of-Study assessments, running records, and ELA state test results. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will focus during common planning on monitoring student performance and deepening assessment practices to make purposeful modifications to lessons/units of study, provide actionable feedback and increase teacher knowledge of pedagogical practices that improve planning by standard for all students including those in subgroups in the area of reading fluency and comprehension. All classroom teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal Lead Teachers The work of teacher teams will be to review units of study to ensure alignment to CCLS and include additional scaffolds and modifications that address the needs of sub groups such as SWDs and ELLs and opportunities to challenge higher level learners. Teachers will participate in fluid professional development during Monday professional development sessions including developing proficiency in planning literacy and utilizing IREADY reports and program resources to provide supplemental instruction during small group and station teaching. Classroom and AIS teachers Mondays Sept. - Dec. 2018 Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Leads Lesson Goals for targeted students will be linked to strategies that will promote increasing reading comprehension, reading fluency and increase in reading rate and include language objectives. Through meaningful use of data, the goal will be to understand the standards that students are deficient in and plan accordingly for direct and small group instruction. Teachers will engage in cycles of inquiry with a specific focus on improving achievement All teachers Ongoing 40-90 minutes per month Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Leads, ENL staff 8 for the targeted subgroups. Revisions to tasks and assessments will be a direct result of the Inquiry Process. Sept. - June 2019 Teachers will calculate growth % within pre and post assessment tasks and maintain this data online and determine adequate proficiency towards meeting the grade level standards. Teachers will utilize IREADY reports and F and P benchmark data to determine reading standards and behaviors that must be reflected in individualized planning. Through PD Monday time, teachers and paraprofessionals will develop a deeper understanding of the reading process and supporting students who struggle through guided reading, intervention systems and think aloud strategy work. We will plan multiple opportunities to celebrate Literacy within the classroom setting so that families have an opportunity to engage with teachers and students and observe critical thinking task. Workshops and assemblies will be directly related to the curriculum unit maps and help inform parents about the topics, resources and involve them in helping their children excel. Parents will meet with teachers to discuss IREADY data. Families Monthly Sept. 2018 June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Leads 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be provided with monthly newsletters that detail the goals for each unit and subject area by the classroom teacher.. Parents will also receive cluster and related provider letters that inform parents of goals and events that support learning. Monthly informational newsletters will be sent home by the principal. The school website will be updated weekly by the parent coordinator and technology teacher and will include parent resources, tools, websites and videos to help understand the CCLS. Parent workshops will be provided in an on-going manner by school staff to support the classroom content in all subject areas and give opportunities for parents to attend celebrations, assemblies and workshops that are informative and help parents understand the standards for each grade level demanded by the CCLS. Iready Data will inform parents of specifically targeted standards for improvement with resources to use at home to improve the instructional time spent on intervention work. IREADY data meetings will be scheduled up to 2 times per year with parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 9  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. After-school programs, as well as Saturday Academy test prep and enrichment classes, will provide additional support for students in ELA; AIS teachers will provide differentiated small group instruction to meet the needs of all students in ELA, flexibility in scheduling allowing for scheduled team meetings to occur that supports the Inquiry Process and Professional learning around improving instruction. Students will have an opportunity to utilize IREADY ELA for intervention instruction that focused on standards based learning. Our budget will support the purchase of the program and coverage that will take place to ensure proper professional learning and understanding of data reports by teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, by making adjustments to existing curriculum and pedagogy, % of students in the target group will demonstrate an increase of at least .5 year's growth in reading benchmark running record level or one grade point unit of study assessment (standards aligned tasks pre to). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We will utilized IREADY reading data on an ongoing manner to target specific areas of deficit and monitor improvements by standards for reading. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? School Culture ● 3.4 (High Expectations): High expectations are systematically communicated to the entire school community including teachers, students and parents via several modes of communications. Professional development, parent workshops and teacher feedback place students on a path of college and career readiness. (Well Developed) Impact: Structures that support high expectations across all constituencies result in a culture of mutual accountability between the school and families and promote an environment where all students have ownership over their educational experience and are prepared for the next level. This past year our school quality guide and NYC survey results indicated that our school is working to maintain a supportive environment. Data shows that according to the framework element we have shown an increase in this area from 3.48 to 3.83. Our attendance averages 92% for the year. While our school averages 92.5% attendance for the year, there is a high percentage of chronically absent students who are also our lowest performing students. Some of these students are students with disabilities or at risk for not meeting the grade level criteria. According to recent 2017-18 school quality guide data staff members feel that there is a need for discipline to be fairly communicated and implemented across the school and that a large percentage of teachers responded that a lot or all of the adults at their school do not recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 1  By June, 2019, 65% of targeted students (chronically absent/low-performing) will reach their individual learning goals in at least two of the 4 core subject areas as measured by pre-post Unit-of-Study assessments and/or social studies /science report card grades. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? We will analyze data and target a sub group of students who demonstrated less than 85% average attendance for the 2017-18 school year and received level 1 report card grades in content area subjects. Teachers Students Sept -October 2018 Attendance Team Principal and AP, Classroom Teachers Through teacher observations and OORS data reports we will identify students who are most at-risk for behavioral issues that contribute to low academic performance in the content area. Monthly PBIS training for staff and parents will be communicated and inclusive of communicating school discipline policies, procedures and intended outcomes for both behavior and attendance. Staff Parents Ongoing Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Admin and PBIS members Discipline and Behavior management Professional learning for staff and paraprofessionals will be provided. A monthly attendance incentive will be awarded for 100% attendance and most improved. Students with 3 consecutive months of good attendance (97%) and above will be invited with their families to a breakfast. Students showing improvement in attendance from the previous year will be invited to a breakfast with their families. Monthly attendance workshops and one to one meetings will be given by parent coordinator, principal, attendance and classroom teachers for students in the subgroup. The workshops will pertain to nutrition, healthy habits, homework help, good attendance and fostering a love of reading and math at home 3 PBIS initiatives will support social emotional learning for students who are targeted as low performing and have averaged 85% or less attendance. Students Monthly October 2018 to June 2019 Teachers will revise curriculum and assessment tasks in the four major subject areas to reflect the current standards and programs being utilized. The assessments will measure learning during each of the four units of study. Assessment data from units of study and content area assessments for Amplified Science and Social Studies will allow teachers to collaboratively examine student learning through the Inquiry Process and make adjustments to teaching. All teaches and Science Cluster Sept. 2018 to June 2019 40-60 minutes monthly Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers PBIS committee Principal, Assistant Principal,Grade Leaders, Science Leads 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be invited to a Breakfast with the Principal on a bi-monthly basis to open communication and strengthening the value of good academics, good habits, nutrition and school attendance and participation. . Teachers in classrooms will invite families for a minimum of two parent workshops and family engagement events and provide monthly out reach to the families of our neediest students including Character Building Assemblies Student of the month assemblies will promote good citizenship and work habits including attendance and will be awarded at monthly PTA meetings. Parental involvement in visiting and attending character building assemblies and performances by grade and class. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. . Title 1 funding and wellness grant funds will support the implementation of a goal centered around building the social emotional learning of students in a supportive and positive school environment. PBIS systems will be implemented to support improvement in social emotional learning. Funding will be utilized to provide professional 4  learning to both staff and parents and strengthen understanding of social emotional learning and PBIS. Per session will be allocated for teachers to form a PBIS committee. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, mId-year attendance reports and OORS data will show positive gains of at least 50% of students in the target group improving both attendance and mid year progress report card grades, unit of study and running records by an increase of .5 or more in content area grades. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Specific units of measure are content area grades , OORS report and attendance data as evidenced in a data spreadsheet the school will use for tracking purposes for this target group. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Upon reflecting on the most recent MOTP overall ratings, as well as, specific ADVANCE data, it is evident that although there are highly effective teachers, there is always room for further growth and improvements to teacher practices. We recently engaged in a Quality Review and were given "well developed" across all five indicators. Pedagogy 1.2 was our area of celebration. Our area of focus was assessment. After completing all initial planning conferences (IPC’s) in September and Summative Conferences in June, 70% of teachers expressed a desire to strengthen knowledge of mathematical practices and increasing opportunities for productive struggle in both their planning and teaching . Teachers also expressed an need to deepen learning of additional strategies for working with ELLs, FELLs and SWD. Danielson Framework tool for teacher observational Data 2018 indicates that 31% of teachers are HE overall but that the average rating in 1a. was a 3.0 and in 1e a 3.5 out of 4.0. Student engagement data indicated that teacher MOTP for our school averaged 3.1 this school year, indicating there is a need to strengthen planning and content knowledge that informs student engagement for our lower performing students by introducing scaffolds and differentiation but also decreasing reliance on these tools and allowing for meaningful productive work opportunities that engage learners critical thinking. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Through meaningful teacher, collaboration, by June 2019, 75% of targeted students in the bottom one-third sub-group (K-5) including ELLs and SWDs will meet their individual mathematics goals as evidenced by pre-post Units-of Study assessments and iReady Data. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. Professional Development will be given and Professional Learning Communities will be formed on the following topics: math practices, target of learning standards within each Envision unit aligned to state assessments (gr. 3-5) and planning instruction (Danielson 1e, 1a) using data and supporting learning through diverse methodologies and practices using both Envision and IREADY. All teachers/ paras Ongoing 1-2 Monday Professional Learning sessions Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, district support, Instructional Leads 2. Ongoing PD will be available and customized to each teacher’s needs, and access to external PD’s when available. External and Internal through Pearson support and Tony Falco IREADY will continue to be prevalent, especially around student achievement among our ELLs and SWDs subgroups in the area of supporting mathematics through critical thinking opportunities and task designs to promote thinking and practice. 3. Grade Teams will engage in study groups, lesson studies, and revisions of curriculum maps that that enhance pedagogical practices by strengthen content knowledge and practices that engage learners and increase opportunities for critical thinking and multi-step problem solving in math. Intervisit cycles will support new and seasoned teacher development and share best instructional practices (1a, Content and Pedagogy Danielson and 3c engaging the learner) in the area of mathematics Teachers Monthly Sept. 2018 June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, PL Sessions offerings and Instructional Leads within the School PD Team 7  Teacher Teams across all grades will work collaboratively and have opportunities for vertical planning and sharing of inquiry data one Tuesday per month during extended professional time to refine teaching strategies to ensure coherence of CCLS aligned assessment tasks across all grades and examine evidence in planning and tasks of 3b. Critical thinking through Math questioning and discussion as well as 3c. opportunities for students to engage in learning through higher-order thinking tasks and productive struggle. Students will use IREADY math up to 45 minutes per week to improve math skills as a math station activity or labsite activity. Students Monthly Sept 2018 -June 2019 Classroom Teachers Administrators Teacher planning for student groups will utilize Envision resources and IREADY data and will allow for more opportunities for students to be grouped by level and offer more opportunity for critical thinking and discussion and discourse that demonstrate higher level learning in classroom activities. Through strategic use of parental engagement time and parent conferences we will support understanding math standards for families and support activities that build number sense and multi- step problem solving school-home support. Parents Students Tuesdays weekly Sept. 2018 June 2019 Administration Teacher Leads Student led conferences will be conducted on every grade to promote student thinking and articulation of grade level goals and next steps to meeting the standard for math up to one time per year. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 8  Through strategic use of monthly Tuesday parental engagement time and parent conferences we will support understanding of critical thinking and mathematical standards through the new Envsion and Iready programs. Student led conferences will be conducted on every grade to promote student thinking and articulation of grade level goals and next steps to meeting the standards for math. Teachers and students will also communicate and review their IREADY data with parents up to twice per year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monies needed for covering teachers so they may attend ongoing PD, as needed. Ample opportunities within the school community to grow in teacher practice such as class intervisitations with meaningful feedback from peers, in addition to Advance feedback with actionable next steps. Per diem monies will be allocated for half and full day planning sessions to plan math curriculum units of study including the assessment tasks for each grade and attend IREADY data trainings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of collaborative teacher planning in the area of math an increase of 50%in the targeted group showing growth and at least .5% increase in mastery on units 1 and 2 unit of study tasks and IREADY math reports. By February 2019, as a result of collaborative teacher planning, in the area of math, 60% teachers will demonstrate an increase in domain 1 component e HEIDI rating of .5. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Data for teacher in domain 1e and 1a will demonstrate 60% of teachers improving planning and pedagogy in the area of mathematics in domain 1e and 1a. As a result of improved teacher pedagogy, data reports by math unit 9  will provide us. with standard specific information that shows improved student mastery on the post assessment tasks and IREADY reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Overall, MOTP data for all 4 components of the Danielson Framework indicate that 33% of teachers are Highly Effective, 63% Effective, 4% Developing and 0% Ineffective. 2017 -2018 Danielson Framework Observation data showed the following data for component 3b Questioning and Discussion: 8.5% of teachers are Highly Effective 84% of teachers are Effective 7% of teachers are Developing 0% are ineffective 2017 -2018 Danielson Framework Observation data showed the following data for component 3d Assessment: 11.66 % of teachers are Highly Effective 84.66 % of teachers are Effective 3..68 % of teachers are Developing 0% are ineffective The data indicates that less than one fourth of our teachers are highly effective in the area of Questioning and Discussion and Assessment. As a result, next year we will continue to provide intense focus and professional development around this component to strengthen teacher practice and increase student achievement through teacher,self and peer assessment to improve the quality of student work in the area of writing. Teachers in our school have expressed a desire for a more rigorous writing program that is closely aligned to state CCLS. Teacher feedback this past school year has centered on helping students understand writing mechanics and genre through use of specific rubrics and checklist as well as designing lessons that expose students to shared writing and mentor writing texts within their mini lessons. This work will continue this school year. 1  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through established structures that support assessment cycles of professional learning and an Inquiry based approach, 50% of all students in grades 2-5 will achieve grade level standards in writing as measured by genre specific rubrics and assessments which are included in the ELA units of study tasks. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Participation in a school contracted level LCI - professional learning institute for lead teachers in grades 2-5 and administrators focusing on developing critical thinking through questioning and discussion establishing and implementing effective formative and summative assessments structures. Teacher Leads Monthly Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Grade Leaders Cycles of Inquiry will be designed to focus on examining student written responses and planning and revising our curriculum units of study to be more reflective in increasing student opportunities to demonstrate a knowledge of standards based writing practices through scaffolds, questioning and discussions and opportunities for research. Through cycles of feedback during formal and informal observations and intervisits using Danielson Framework; teachers will develop stronger practices in the area of aggressive monitoring and the use of formative assessment that engage students in higher level questioning and discussion techniques that will improve writing skills. All teachers Monthly Sept. 2018 -June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal School level professional learning opportunities during PD Mondays, Chancellor Conferences and within and across grade intervisits will focus on developing an understanding of conditions of student discussion techniques and increasing critical thinking through discussion and demonstrated in writing. Teachers and Paras Monthly Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, PD team members Teachers will also engage in learning centered around explicit modeling through use of mentor texts and shared writing experiences. Intervisits and demonstrations will support teacher learning. 3  We will promote parent leadership and engagement as a key lever for school improvement: Parents Students Ongoing Sept. 2018-June 2019 Lead Teachers, AIS Providers, Grade Leaders, Classroom Teachers Utilizing Tuesday parent engagement time to meet with parents to discuss the progress and needs of their children. Monthly newsletters for parents from both teachers and clusters to inform parents of the goals and topics for the units in each subject area and provide suggestions for increasing background knowledge of specific topics. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be involved with their child in student led conferences about standards based student work in the area of writing. (March 2018) Classroom and school wide literacy celebrations will be held and parents will be invited to grade level writing workshops to help them understand the writing process and expectations for each genre and the goals for writing rubrics. (Two times per year) Writing Goals and Rubrics shared monthly with families via the monthly newsletters. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Any resources needed specific to a teacher’s area of need or specific ADVANCE component that would assist in strengthening teacher practices. We will provide internal and external professional development for teachers through 4  school staff and vendors in the area of 3B. Questioning and Discussion and 3d. Assessment. Per Diem and Per Session funds will be used for professional learning and intervists. Funding will also be utilized to contract vendors for PD. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, student writing data will show a .5% increase in writing tasks as measured by ELA unit of study pre to post culminating tasks. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Classroom Genre rubrics for ELA Units of study Nov and February 2019 student, class, and grade level performance on pre to post assessment data on writing specific genres post assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2016-17 Quality Guide and School Survey 92% of parents agree that they are well informed through communication received from the school. 90% of parents agree that teachers and parents/guardians think of each other as partners in educating children. 94% of parents report seeing their child's projects, artwork, homework, tests and quizzes. 91% of parents strongly agree that school staff regularly communicates with parents/guardians about how parents can help students learn. 59% of parents responded that since the beginning of the school year they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school eg. volunteering in classrooms, school events. Based on this data, we feel that our school can develop stronger partnerships that involve parents in more aspects of school life. Part 2 – Annual Goal 6  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase family engagement activities in the area of literacy that will result in 50% of our targeted students which include SWDs and/or our Black and Hispanic population demonstrating adequate F & P reading levels of growth. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal, Assistant Principal, ENL teachers, AIS teachers, Data Specialist, Technology teacher, related service providers, parent coordinator, SBST Principal, Assistant Principal, Classroom teachers , ENL teachers, SBST, Lead Teachers Continue to deepen community relationships with families and increase the number of activities provided by our Parent Coordinator, lead teachers and SAT to provide parents of SWDs opportunities to learn more about how to support educational needs based on ELA standards for literacy in all grades. Parents, Sept. 2018- June 2019 Parents, Sept. 2018-June 2019 Increase in translation service and communication tools to strengthen home school-partnerships. Targeted workshops for parents of children with disabilities to develop phonics and early literacy skills. Increase teacher-parent meetings for parents of students in kindergarten to explain the units of study and how parents can support reading readiness skills at home. Increase teacher-parent workshops and study groups related to improving instruction for SWD and/or Black and Hispanic students using and understanding the value of the IREADY intervention systems and data. Increase parent workshops for SWD by contracting external organizations such as understood.org. 8  Teachers will engage in guided reading professional learning to support developing literacy skills and providing direct instruction to small groups of students. Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Admin Team and Grade leaders, PD team members and instructional leads Teachers will strengthen ELA instructional practices by receiving quality feedback on ELA instruction in the area of planning (1e) and student engagement (Danielson Framework 3c) Teachers will consistently use IREADY ELA with fidelity and communicate data to students and parents and strengthen instruction by focusing on standards that require additional teaching for our neediest populations during small group learning. Parents Students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrative Team Parental engagement time on Tuesdays will be utilized for teachers to provide telephone and face to face meetings with parents on the progress and performance of their children. IREADY and RAZ kids online intervention workshops will be presented up to 3 times per year. Parents and children will participate and learn how to effectively use the program for intervention. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 9  Continue to increase the number of parent workshops targeting the academic needs of students in K-2 and 3-5 in the areas of literacy development. NIA and Y community services are housed at PS 212 as an after school CBO program. We will increase partnership with these organizations to provide targeted academic after school instruction for students and enrichment opportunities based on interest. We will contact non for profit organization such as understood.org or external programs such as RAMAPO to provide both teacher and parent workshops that increase knowledge of how to support students with disabilities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will utilize funding sources to contract external PD or provide per session funding to increase parental involvement opportunities by teacher led workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will examine data for our neediest student including our SWD population and our Black and Hispanic populations to demonstrate an increase in reading levels by 2-5 levels using F and P reading data benchmarks October and January. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 0  Google Docs F and P reading benchmark sheets for all grades, classes, subgroups including targeted groups of students who are the neediest along with a review of pre and post ELA data for our neediest students in units of study ELA 1-4. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small groups During the school day After School Program One to one with classroom teacher/para AISpull out teacher Small groups During the school day After School Program One to one with classroom teacher/para AISpull out service grades K -5 Small groups During the school day One-to-one with Science teacher/para After School Program Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) State test scores Classroom performance Guided reading groups Close reading Reading conferences Students who are PID or performing in bottom third of grade level K-2 one on one with teacher FundationsPhonics grades K to 2 Mathematics State test scores Classroom performance Students who are PID or performing in bottom third of grade level K- Classroom performance State test scores (grade 4 only) Science Small group instruction Fluency practice One to one conferencing with teacher Math Intervention Program Science Cluster Small group instruction 2  Social Studies Classroom performance At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Overall classroom performance and referral to PPT Hands-On experiments scaffolding Small groups Small groups During the school day One-to-one with teacher/para One-to-one with teacher/para scaffolding scaffolding Guidance services, small group instruction Small groups One to one with teacher/para After School Program as part of content ELAintervention. During the school day 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 22 students are currently in Temporary Housing 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in temporary housing will be provided with student supplies and materials that they are in need. This will include basic supplies such as uniforms, school supplies, and materials to support their instructional needs. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Not Applicable 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  Not Applicable 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Not Applicable 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. P.S. 212 only hires teachers who are NY State certified. The school administration works with our HR network partner and together, we review all teacher applications. Vacancies are posted on the open market system. Applicants who apply to the vacancy are interviewed. Once hired, the teachers receive rigorous professional development on an ongoing basis. This is conducted at the school level with our Instructional Lead teachers and our data specialist. Additionally, our best practices are shared by the teachers throughout the year through teacher teams. Lead teachers, AIS Teachers and Cluster teachers are sent to network professional development sessions throughout the year to attend study groups in CCLS in literacy and math. New teachers are provided with a mentor teacher who serves as a “professional resource” throughout the year. Intervisitation is also arranged with a master teacher on an as-needed basis. School administrators, having been trained in frameworks for teachers, turnkey this information to the teaching staff. All teachers are then observed formally and informally using the Advance rubrics. Incorporating the Advance rubrics in daily planning of instruction will assist teachers to become highly effective. Citywide professional development is offered to the staff as well. Additionally, highly qualified funds are made available to our teaching staff by providing them with an opportunity to return to school to further their area of expertise. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). P.S. 212 follows a 4 week cycle Professional Development Plan. The plan was created by the Instructional Lead teachers to meet the needs of all teachers. The plan allows for differentiated PD and the cycle is as follows: * Week A: Facilitated Professional Development by Instructional Lead teachers that are created based off teacher feedback/reflection forms. PD is offered by Instructional Lead teachers, Data Specialist and Service Providers to ensure that teachers are given a variety of strategies that can be implemented in their classrooms. Some PD that has been offered: * Technology in the Content Area 6  * Strategies to help our SWDs * Infusing Literacy into Content Areas * Looking at SWD Trends using the NYS ELA Assessment * Danielson Framework *Writing IEP SMART goals *Creating a Quality IEP We will increase pedagogical knowledge through reading current literature on the following topics: ELL strategies and practices to increase language development. Growth Mindset, Student Led Conferencing Literature and Development of Reading Comprehension Strategies *Week B: Inquiry- Looking at Student Work: During this week, teachers work with their teacher teams to analyze student work and discuss next steps for students as well as for instruction. Teachers work collaboratively to discuss strengths and weakness of student work and strategies that can be used to help all students achieve success. *Week C: Data Analysis- During this week, teachers analyze data by looking at trends and focusing on specific subgroups of students. The data specialist also provides support during this week’s cycle and teachers can access SchoolNet to generate data reports. This time is also used for teachers to organize groups, develop differentiated tasks and scaffolded activities based off student data. *Week D: Revising and Refining Curriculum: The last week of the cycle allows teachers to work collaboratively with their teacher teams to focus on revising and refining their curriculum maps, lesson plans, units of study, etc. Teachers use their data analysis to help them determine which standards to address and which topics to revisit during their daily instruction. Paraprofessionals accompany teachers to all professional development sessions to allow for school-wide understanding of the Common Core Learning Standards and school wide-routines/practices. Paraprofessionals also participate in a study group centered around areas they have expressed interest in or pertain to the grade level or population they work with (2 times per month) Paraprofessionals also participate in direct and differentiated pd pertaining to the area that they are working to support students with special needs in. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 7  not applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). not applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The school provides an annual meeting for the families of incoming Kindergarten students. During this meeting, families receive a comprehensive overview of what to expect in Kindergarten, develop an understanding of the NYS Kindergarten Foundation for the Common Core, how to extend learning at home. During the annual meeting the Kindergarten teachers provide information to support their children as they enter the public school system. Throughout the year, the Early Childhood Teachers, Social Workers and Parent Coordinator provide regularly scheduled meetings for families of pre-school students. During these meetings parents are given information in early childhood development, curriculum support and how to extend learning at home. Additionally, the Early Childhood Teacher and Social Workers interface with the Committee on Pre-School Special Education and supports and assists families involved with the Committee on Pre-School Special Education. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers completed a survey to reflect what was the most useful type of data. In the Fall of 2018, the MOSL (Measure Of Student Learning) Committee will be formed consisting of the Assistant Principal, UFT Chapter Chairperson and Teaching Staff. This Committee will meet, discuss and choose the assessment options to measure student learning. In the Fall of 2018 a Professional Development Committee will be formed and will meet monthly to discuss various topics for future professional development. Monthly Grade and Cluster Team leaders will meet monthly with the administrative team to disseminate school wide information to their grade level teams and monitor the effectiveness of current structures. Teachers will reflect on current assessments and units. 8  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) p.13-14/p.19-20 p. 19-20 p. 24-26 p 13, 14, 19, 24 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 501536 57375 16334 0 4440835 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 9   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 212, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S.212 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 1  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Parents will be informed regarding Title 1 updates during our PTA meetings by our Title 1 Liaison.  Parents will offer suggestions on how to spend the Title 1 parental involvement money during PTA and SLT meetings. A vote will be held during the PTA meeting. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  memos and letters will be translated and mailed home in various languages. ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 3  School-Parent Compact (SPC) [P.S.212] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 4  ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; 5  ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 6  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 7  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 70 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationalea As per the SAM #31 P.S. 212 has been allocated supplemental funds to be used for 124 Ells are at our school. The funding will be used to support an after school and Saturday supplemental program to support ELL students and former ELL students. This program encourages students to strive academically. The program is for ELA and Math enrichment. This after school and Saturday Program enrichment will help students by aligning to common core by helping ELL's re-visit topics they were struggling with during the course of the school day, re-teach skills needed to reach grade level expectations, enhance language skills for both math, English, as well as content area, build vocabulary, enrich and scaffold knowledge to achieve progression and help prepare students for state exams. The students were chosen based on data from the NYSESLAT, EDAT - ELL Analysis tool, ELA and Math state tests and current F and P reading benchmark data. The data shows that the subgroup selected needs support in ELA and Math as well as reading and writing skills. Quantitative data will be gathered through the use of pre and post assessments, mid-chapter reviews and summative assessments. Each sessions attendance will be taken on an attendance sheet and kept on file in the main office. Program notification letters will be copied and kept in the main office both in English and in native languages. All records for this after school program will be kept in the main office. Subgroups/Grade Levels: ELL and former ELLs in grades 3, 4 and 5. There are 79 students currently entitled to ENL services in grades 3-5 and 13 former ELL students that are 2 years or less. Students will be taught in grade leveled groups with differentiated instruction within the grade level groups. The content area teacher as well as the ENL teacher are either co-teaching or the ENL teacher will work independently with the ENL students. There will be 3 classes, one for each of the grades 3, 4 and 5. Each class will be taught by a teacher with a Common Branch license. The ENL teacher with a TESOL certification will push in to each class for 40 minutes to co-teach and also work with small groups. The ratio of ENL students to TESOL licensed teacher will be approximately 12:1. We will offer a similar model of supplemental instruction for students in K-2 afterschool and/or Saturday Program time. Students will engage in content that supports listening, speaking, reading and writing with scaffolds and supports . The TESOL certified teacher will push-in to support small groups and use language acquisition strategies. Schedule and Duration: The program will run January 6, 2019 until June 20, 2019. The schedule for the after school program is for beginner/entering Ells and commanding ELLs on 2:25pm-4:45pm on Wednesdays and Thursdays each week (unless there is a holiday). Saturday Programs will run 8:30 am to 11:15 am for emerging and transitioning Ells in grades K-5only. Language of Instruction: Students are instructed in English only by a certified ENL teacher and one content area teacher. The teachers utilize a team teaching approach or a stand alone ENL model while differentiating their lessons for the varying grade levels to meet their students' needs. Instruction is given with different approaches targeting all learning types. 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Home language support will be in the form of bilingual dictionaries and books. Any communication with parents will be translated into the appropriate native language. # and types of certified teachers: 2 certified ENL teacher and 2 content area/common branch teacher. Types of Materials: Materials that were ordered- Common Core Performance Coach (ELA) - Grades 3, 4 and 5 by Truimph Learning and Common Core Performance Coach for Math-Grades 3, 4 and 5 by Triumph Learning. Learning A to Z online program and RAZ kids online reading program to act as a supplemental to the core curriculum. IREADY ELA and Math Intervention Program will also be utilized at no cost to the program since students have existing accounts from other funding sources. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Teachers receive ongoing staff development through the use of on-site and off-site workshops, NYC Department of Education and through LCI and Generation Ready consultant. One TESOL teacher working in the program is involved in a series of PD being provided by Generation Ready on the use of ENL strategies once per month until April. The teacher also went to a PD on Co-teaching during the month of October given by the Brooklyn South Field Office. Two Mondays a month for the duration of the after-school program, the TESOL teacher will turn-key the learnings to TESOL teachers as well as the TItle III teachers. There will also be PDs through Continous Learning: Improvement Science on ELL strategies which include topics such as: co-teaching methodologies, language objectives, vocabulary/language instruction, differentiation for each proficiency level, aligning their assessments to the state test rubrics as well as using language acquisition usage according to English proficiency level. There will be agendas and attendance sheets at the PD sessions. This will be kept in the main office. Teachers to receive training: Bonnie Merone- ENL teacher, Elina Ivenkova-ENL teacher, Kelly Isaacson- ENL teacher. All P.S. 212 staff members will receive staff development on-site and off-site. One teacher in grades K, 2, 3, and 5 will develop labsite models for push in instruction as a result of the professional learning. Schedule and Duration: ENL teachers allow classroom teachers to come during preparation periods to observe ENL demonstration lessons and co-planning opportunities will be provided through school programming. On site staff development workshops are scheduled during Monday's professional development time. Other workshops will be given throughout the school year on an 'as needed' basis and will reflect the needs of the teachers and student population/data. ENL teachers PD's provided by and scheduled as per the Brooklyn South field office or the contracted consultants through LCI, Generation Ready and Continous Learning Improvement Science. Topics to be covered: Professional Development (which is at no cost to the program)will cover computer and technology development, ELA and Math preparation for state tests, ELL student methodologies and strategies to use in the classroom, parent outreach, Revising currciulum units to reflect language standards and incorporating content into reading and writing, and vocabulary to strengthening ELL language skills. Name of Providers: Mrs. R. Horne and Mrs. H. Stern, Principal and Assistant Principal, The data specialist:Maria Belkadi, Danielle Badolato:Lead/Reading specialist, The Computer Teacher, Mrs. Moore, ENL teachers: Bonnie 0  Part C: Professional Development Merone, Kelly Isaacson and Elina Ivenkova, ENL Teachers and contracted consultants from the aformentioned organizations. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: X Rationale: Workshops give parents an opportunity to speak directly with other ELL parents, the principal and assistant principal, teachers, the parent coordinator, ENL teachers as well as other P.S 212 staff members. Workshops for ELL parents are given ongoing, throughout the school year at no cost to the funding. Our hope is for ELL parents to become more involved in their child's education as well as the school community. Schedule and Duration: The principal-Rina Horne, has a "breakfast for the principal" with parents on a bimonthly basis. The dates for these are bi-monthly beginnng in September until June 2019. The parent coordinator, Ilia Liff; also has meetings for parents. During these meetings informational packets are handed out in numerous native languages. Translators on our staff or bi-lingual parents are present to help with communication. Dates for these workshops are October 2018, December 2018, November 2018, February 2019, April 2019 and June 2019. Newsletters are presented to parents to keep them aware of monthly school-wide functions. The parent coordinator also has meetings along with the school food nutrition members. These meetings are at no cost to the program and help parents understand the nutritional needs of their children. These meetings are scheduled for December 2018, January 2019, February 2019, April 2019 and June 2019. The ENL teachers provide outreach for parental engagment throughout the school year. The dates of these workshops are June 2016 (pre-kindergarten orientation), September 2018 (Welcome for parents/meet ENL Teachers, parent video viewing, parent choice selection for placement in a program for the school year), October 27, 2018 (Special services meeting), November 2018 (Teaching parents about common core/ELA and math standards/help for parents to do at home), December 2018 (The special education staff and services available to parents). Topics to be Covered: During these meetings and breakfasts, parents have the opportunity to speak directly and informally with staff members. These sessions are geared towards keeping an open, informal line of communication between the school and parents. Happily, many ELL parents enjoy these sessions and make a stronger connection to the school family and they can express directly to the Principal and other staff members their wants and needs. At these meetings, parents expressed to the principal that they would like workshops in the following areas: Adult English classes, Knowledge of State Exam Content in Math, Science , ELA and NYSESLAT, Special Education, and at-home help. ELL parents are offered English classes created specially for them. These classes are provided on Thursdays from 8:15am to 9:15am. The classes begin in November 2015 and will continue until the end of May 2017. The ENL team of teachers, Bonnie Merone, Kelly Isaacson and Elina Ivenkova are the teachers of these classes. These classes offer parents an opportunity to learn English in a non-stressed, risk free environment. These classes once again foster a close bond to the school and our community. By assisting parents with language acquisition we are hopeful they can better assist their children with their educational 1  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities opportunities. Workshops are given by our Computer Specialist Ms Moore, our Reading Specialist Ms Badalato, our Math Specialist Ms O'Connor, our data specialist Ms Belkadi and our SETTS and IEP Coordinator Ms Orellana and Ms Hyman. The school presents a reading and math evening for children and their parents. During these 'special' evenings, parents and children along with teachers enjoy literature, math and hands-on learning. Ms Liff, our parent coordinator, is the liaison between the parents and the school staff. She expresses parent needs throughout the year and we coordinate upcoming workshops accordingly. How parents will be notified: At the beginning of the school year parents are given a letter asking them to select what language they would prefer to have school communication in. Once these letters are received back correspondence then is sent home in the parents preferred language. All letters from then on are sent home to parents in the communication/language they requested. Translators are also available to assist our ELL parents for open school day and evening sessions. Translators on staff are utilized as necessary to assist parents with communication. P.S. 212 also makes use of the Department of Education translation services for contacting and reaching out to parents. All teachers have the phone numbers available to them so that contacting and speaking with an ELL parent is an easier experience for both parties. The school also includes ELL parents in many school-wide activities such as: The Pumpkin Patch, The Halloween Parade, graduation ceremonies, kindergarten orientation, Field Day, Dance Festival and the 5th grade end of the year show and classroom Family Fun Friday activities. Keeping our ELL parents involved and bonded to our school and community is a priority here at P.S. 212 and we strive to keep these connections strong. Records of Parent Engagement Activities in the form of agendas, attendance and invitations will be kept in binders in the main office. All of these materials are distributed in the parents language of choice. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 21 School Name The Lady Deborah Moody Borough Brooklyn School Number 212 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Rina Horne Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Bonnie Merone, Elina Ivenkova, Teacher/Subject Area Kelly Isaacson, ENL Teacher/Subject Area Danielle Badolato,AIS literacy Related-Service Provider Superintendent Isabel DiMola Assistant Principal Helen Stern Coach School Counselor Jessica Nunno Parent Randi Garay Parent Coordinator Ilia Liff Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) Lynette Vasquez, Bilingual SAT C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 4  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 644 Total number of ELLs 126 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 19.57% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 212 uses Fountas and Pinnell to assess students in literacy skills. Teachers also use pre-assessments for reading, embedded tests and culminating tasks for each unit in ELA; for math pre-assessments are used for each chapter, test performance based assessments and culminating tasks for each math unit. Reading Inventories are administered to students in grades k to 2 if there is an observable deficit in phonological readiness and/or print awareness. This comprehensive assessment provides the pedagogical staff with specific data on areas of need. All this data helps to assess levels for the ELL students as well as their ability to speak and understand reading prompts, math and writing tasks. This data is then used to assist the ELL student with future reading placement, math placement and leveled reading material for independent reading and writing. Fountas and Pinnell assesses students in the areas of phonemic awareness, phonics, oral expression, fluency in 5  reading and writing as well as skills in listening and speaking. Analysis of data has shown that many ELL's are more proficient in phonemic awareness but have difficulty with comprehension and writing skills. Based on data from the F & P, we utilize a strong literature based curriculum in ENL and in the classroom. We feel this will help immerse ELL students into early literacy and improve their reading comprehension, vocabulary, phonics, fluency, and writing. Teachers use individual goal-setting and update these goals on an ongoing basis. ENL teachers articulate with classroom teachers as well as utilize grade level curriculum maps to align instruction and help achieve the goals and standards for each student. For the 2018-2019 school year we will also be incorporating the i-Ready reading and math computer program to target individual student needs. This program differentiates for each student meeting their individual needs and learning abilities. The program also provides feedback to the teacher for growth and measurement of students. This program is common core aligned. The program pinpoints student needs and monitors progress. There are also teacher lessons to help provide rigorous, grade level instruction. There are ongoing ENL classroom assessments through formal test-taking, observations, as well as ENL class projects and conference note taking. ENL teachers use the results of the NYSESLAT to determine scheduling, as well as lesson and curriculum planning. The Fountas and Pinnell reading levels help teachers to place students in the proper reading groups. Writing samples are done on an ongoing basis to help assess students progress as well as provide future instruction. Pre-assessments, chapter test, performance based assessments and culminating tasks after every unit taught ensure students are mastering skills and progressing. Data from NYSESLAT/NYSITELL as well as other tests help teachers plan lessons while emphasizing where deeper instruction is needed in the areas of weakness for their students, particularly within the four sub categories (Listening, Speaking, Writing and Reading). Teachers assess raw scores to determine specific areas of weakness. Constant articulation between classroom teachers, AIS teachers and ENL teachers help to give a 'wider-range picture' of each student and where their strengths and weaknesses lie. Through these varying methods of evaluations, instruction will be determined accordingly. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers are provided coverage three times per year for 'formal' Fountas and Pinnell testing of the whole class. There are also 3-4 'informal' Fountas and Pinnell testing done for all students throughout the school year. The testing for both formal and informal assessing are done to make sure students are achieving reading progress and are able to move to higher reading levels throughout the school year. These assessments are then placed on line by the data specialist to ensure all teachers are able to properly place students for grouping as well as independent assignments. All teachers have grading books for formal assessments that are readily available to all staff members to maintain consistency of educational goals. Pre-assessment, test performance based assessments and culminating tasks for all units in reading and math support the effort to ensure ELL students are progressing and moving forward educationally. ENL teachers have grade books as well with assessment levels and observational notes done for the stand alone classroom as well as the co-teaching classroom. ENL teachers share results with classroom teachers to ensure a holistic picture and grading system for ELL's. ENL teachers are included on all grade level meetings and preparation periods to ensure a cohesive approach to teaching. At PS 212 we are all on the same page and look forward to seeing our ELL population thrive. We are open to any and all support and look forward to incorporating the Imagine Learning program which also has a component for monitoring our ELL's on many different modalities. ELL students are also involved in the NYC performance tasks, periodic assessments, pre-assessments, embedded tasks/tests, culminating tests, baseline tests, 'POW's" (problem of the week), as well as reading skill of the week. All of these assessments, tasks and tests are put online for all teachers to have access to. For some assessments, teachers have a grade book which is available to all teachers and administration to peruse. To support the new i-ready instructional program each floor of the school is equipped with portable I-pads computer stations. These portable computer stations will be circulated to all the rooms on the floor enabling an i-pad use for every student in every classroom throughout our school building. Teachers have received training on using the instructional program and how to use the data to help each student progress throughout the school year. 6  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? At PS 212 we use pre-assessments, test performance based assessments, embedded tests and culminating tests for all units in reading and math. We use these tests results to drive and plan instruction and how quickly or slowly we need to proceed to the next unit or skill. If we see areas of need we will re-teach and go back over a unit students are struggling in. The math and reading units have a built in re-teach and enrichment portion for ELL's that are experiencing difficulty or those that need more rigorous tasks. We evaluate the success of our stand alone ENL program at the end of the year by the use of the NYSESLAT test scores. By analyzing the NYSESLAT data we determine the progress of our ENL students. We also look at each of the modalities individually for each student to see which area is in need of extra instruction and attention for the upcoming school year. We analyze individual instructional goals to determine changes in curriculum and planning for the next school year. We look at data from each students previous NYSESLAT test scores in addition to Fountas and Pinnell reading levels and the progression throughout the school year to determine the growth made from previous years to analyze the program and it's effectiveness. During professional development hours throughout the school year teachers look at writing samples and create scaffolded tasks to develop future curriculum mapping, next steps, thinking points, as well as driving future instruction. During these times, teachers look at MOSL performance tasks to determine next steps in their classrooms and determine expectations for future assessments. Individualized goal setting is also utilized to show progress. We also use the NYC performance tasks and assessments. Portfolios for all students are utilized and are checked by administration throughout the school year. In the portfolios there are formal assessments as well as units of study in reading and math; writing samples as well as content area assessments are also included in these portfolios. There are also 'POW's' (problem of the week) done to assess comprehension and retention of skills taught. A skill of the week is taught to make sure all students are exposed to varying reading techniques. These skills are assessed at the end of each week. For the 2018-2019 school year we will also be incorporating the i-Ready reading and math computer program to target individual student needs. This program differentiates for each student meeting their individual needs and learning abilities. The program also provides feedback to the teacher for growth and measurement of students. This program is common core aligned. The program pinpoints student needs and monitors progress. There are also teacher lessons to help provide rigorous, grade level instruction. Teachers have received training on using the instructional program and how to use the data to help each student progress throughout the school year. This data will help to drive instruction in the classroom. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Testing for both formal and informal assessments are done to make sure students are achieving reading and math progress and are able to move to more advanced reading and math levels throughout the school year. These assessments are then placed on line by the data specialist to ensure all teachers are able to properly place students for grouping as well as independent assignments. As data is gathered teachers align instruction accordingly. If a unit is needed to be re-visited teachers will re-teach the specific needed areas for the students. The reading and math units have a built in re-teach and enrich portion to accommodate students needing support or more rigorous instruction. This intervention is done by the use of summative data at the end of each unit. All teachers have grading books for formal assessments that are readily available to all staff members to maintain consistency of educational goals. ENL teachers have grade books as well with assessment levels and observational notes done in the stand alone classroom as well as the co-teaching classroom. Baseline and benchmark testing is done ongoing throughout the school year. PS 212 uses NYC performance tasks, ELL periodic assessments as well as ongoing portfolios. Teachers share results with staff members and administration. These results ensure ELL's have a holistic picture and grading system. ENL teachers are included on all grade level meetings and preparation periods to ensure a cohesive approach to teaching. At PS 212 we are all on the same page and look forward to seeing our ELL population thrive. We are open to any and all support and look forward to incorporating the Imagine Learning program which also has a component for monitoring our ELL's on many different modalities. ELL students are also involved in 'POW's", as well as reading skill of the week. All of these assessments and tests are put online for all teachers to have access to. For some assessments, teachers have a grade book which is available to all teachers and administration to peruse. For the 2018-2019 school year we will also be incorporating the i-Ready reading and math computer program to target individual student needs. This program differentiates for each student meeting their individual needs and learning abilities. The program also provides feedback to the teacher for growth and measurement of students. This program is common core 7  aligned. The program pinpoints student needs and monitors progress. The program individualizes instruction for each student. Students work at their level and build upon skills to progress at their own pace. There are also teacher lessons to help provide rigorous, grade level instruction as well as individual lesson instruction. Teachers have received training on using the instructional program and how to use the data to help each student progress throughout the school year. This data will help to drive instruction in the classroom. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] P.S. 212 utilizes data for programming of services to help ELL students succeed. There are two AIS teachers who work with students who were held over, are at risk from meeting promotional standards, and beginner ELL students, for more intensive instruction in a small group setting. After school programs are also offered to ELL's in grades 1-5. Students who received a level 1 or 2 on last year's New York State ELA or Math test or are deemed 'at risk' are provided instruction by Academic Intervention teachers. Students at an advanced level have a more rigorous instructional plan. More language and text based instruction will ensure continued success for the higher level ELL student. ENL teachers always make sure to add cultural and linguistic opportunities for our diverse ENL population to share with peers. Studies have shown this adds an intervention and prevention effectiveness for ELL students and helps this population of learners to achieve academic success. The collaboration of the ENL teachers,classroom teachers and students working together for academic success within a rigorous but secure environment helps our ELL population to be motivated and immersed in English instruction. Co-teaching lessons include stories which focus upon foreign countries and how people live, stories presented incorporate a diverse population of people in the reading units, as well as a connection to native language. ENL teachers model reading by read alouds and choral reading to help ELL students learn the rhythm, sounds and vocabulary of the English language. ENL teachers also have a strong emphasis on vocabulary. We understand that some English words are challenging for ELL students and it is important for students to promote oral language development. The ENL teachers understand the importance of drawing upon prior knowledge for ELL students to feel successful. ENL teachers also understand the importance of making 'stand alone' instruction in our classrooms a 'safe, non-judgemental setting' whereas it creates a conducive setting for the ELL student to develop the important skills of speaking, listening, writing and reading. P.S. 212 utilizes the response to intervention framework as mandated by New York State. In the first component we complete the universal screening by administering a baseline of student performance exams and identify students who are not making progress at expected rates. As required by the state, our first step in the universal screening process, students complete the home language survey which helps teachers uncover factors which could help influence students in the English language learning process. This knowledge provides teachers with the insight needed to guide linguistically responsive instructional choices. If an ELL student is flagged for being at risk or below benchmark on any test or competency, the student receives targeted instructional support in a small group setting. P.S. 212 offers, voyager, pull-out/push-in small group reading, pull-out/push-in small group math instruction, and academic 'at-risk' intervention (SETSS). P.S. 212 utilizes a strong core curriculum which includes GO Math, Ready Gen and Phonics/Foundations Program. Teacher's align lessons to the common core standards. Teachers and students collaborate to positively engage around rigorous academic content. Language development and literacy are taught across the curriculum and fostered through conversation between students and teachers in conferences and among students during turn and talks. We offer a quality core instruction which links students background knowledge to content being taught. P.S. 212 provides targeted intervention to ENL's not showing progress in reading, math, writing, science, and social studies. Teachers provide small group instruction on their Professional Development (Circular 6-extra prep) periods. There are AIS teachers as well as an F-status teachers (some of which have licenses in ENL and/or reading and/or special education) which provide services to our ELL population above and beyond their CR part 154 ENL instructional mandates. P.S. 212 regularly monitors the progress of at risk students to determine whether instructional decisions are providing the most success. Teachers and school leaders use the data to determine when it is necessary to adjust instruction for all ELL's. For the 2018-2019 school year we will also be incorporating the i-Ready reading and math computer program to target individual student needs. This program differentiates for each student meeting their individual needs and learning abilities. The program also provides feedback to the teacher for growth and measurement of students. This program is common core aligned. The program pinpoints student needs and monitors progress. The program individualizes instruction for each student. Students work at their level and build upon skills to progress at their own pace. There are also teacher lessons to help provide rigorous, grade level instruction as 8  well as individual lesson instruction. Teachers have received training on using the instructional program and how to use the data to help each student progress throughout the school year. This data will help to drive instruction in the classroom by seeing where students need support and how students are progressing with each new skill taught. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. At PS 212 instruction is aligned according to a multitude of assessments such as NYSESLAT, F & P, ELA, Math, Science, baseline assessments and NYSITELL. The results from this data align our instruction. The RLAT is analyzed to research the 4 modalities of the NYSESLAT and how students are progressing year to year. Levels for new admits to the New York City School System on NYSITELL are also used to plan instruction. The RLAT and EDAT reveals that most ELL students enter the country (NYC system) with limited proficiency in all sub-categories equally. The results show us that these students have not yet learned English in their native country and they are in need of English Language Services. For NYSESLAT and EDAT results, the data has revealed students achieved stronger levels in speaking and listening while struggling most in the area of writing. Since this seems to be the area of struggle for ELL's teachers have aligned instruction to include more writing intensive curriculum planning. We have also used to RLAT to evaluate progress and movement of ELL's year to year. We are happy to say the majority of ELL students move forward and up through the levels of proficiency. We have also discussed the support needed to monitor these students more closely and have decided to incorporate the addition of Imagine Learning. We feel this will help monitor our students on oral fluency and written responses. This program will help to monitor our students progress daily rather than wait for formal assessments to take place. The research has shown this program is instructionally differentiated to accommodate the varying levels and abilities of our ELL population. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? As per RLAT and EDAT results we have decided ELL students can be on a specific level of proficiency but can be very different from a peer on the same level. The modalities are not always indicative of what children can do daily in the classroom. Since the EDAT and RLAT revealed that most ELL students enter the country (NYC system) with limited proficiency in all sub-categories equally and that these students have not yet learned English in their native country, they are in need of English Language Services such as decoding, oral language sounds and blending sounds. For NYSESLAT results, the data has revealed students achieved stronger levels in speaking and listening while struggling most in the area of writing. Since this seems to be the area of struggle for ELL's teachers have aligned instruction to include more writing intensive curriculum planning. We have also used to RLAT and EDAT to evaluate progress and movement of ELL's year to year. We are happy to say the majority of ELL students move forward and up through the levels of proficiency. After discussion about the results we felt ELL students needed support. In order to monitor these students more closely we have decided to incorporate the addition of Imagine Learning. We feel this will help monitor our students on oral fluency, decoding, blending, sounds,and written responses. This program will help to monitor our students progress daily rather than wait for formal assessments to take place. This program has shown it is instructionally differentiated to accommodate the varying levels and abilities of our ELL population. We also are using flocabulary to help ELL students 'see' vocabulary and experience it rather than just read it. These are a few of the structures we have added to our program to try and improve our ELL's success and growth. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 1. a: P.S.212 implements a co-teaching as well as integrated ENL program. Students are grouped together by 9  grade in heterogeneous and homogeneous groups. Students on entering (360 minutes), emerging (360 minutes), transitioning (180 minutes), expanding (180 minutes) as well as commanding (90 minutes) levels receive instruction as per state mandates. The program delivers instruction in grades Kindergarten through Grade 5. Based upon assessments, test scores and teacher articulation, the ENL program is structured to meet each students needs. In addition, during stand-alone ENL periods, we have further broken down the whole group instruction into smaller differentiated groups in order to provide more individualized support, particularly in the areas' of reading and literacy: this change was due to the ELL students' performance on the ELA state test and the NYSESLAT from the previous school year. Our goal for all ELLs is increased proficiency in all the academic areas of the curriculum, as well as in spoken language. The ENL teachers are supportive to all the ELL students and help nurture them into their 'new' homeland. When needed a bilingual paraprofessional is assigned to assist student(s) and help ensure (students native language) comprehension. Our Data Specialist shares results with all the teachers and works closely with the ENL teachers to ensure all ELL's are being serviced as per CR part 154. b. TBE program. If applicable. b. P.S.212 does not have a TBE program at this time. c. DL program. If applicable. c. P.S. 212 does not have a DL program at this time. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2a. To ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to students levels: Entering and emerging students receive ENL instruction both integrated (180 minutes) as well as stand alone (180 minutes) for a total of 360 minutes per week while transitioning and expanding level students receive integrated ENL instruction (180 minutes per week). Commanding students receive 90 minutes of instructional support per week. The instruction of ENL is through stand alone and integrated (co-teaching) instruction. The school programming aligns with the inclusion of ELL entitled stand alone services throughout the day while making sure the students remain their main classroom for all core subject instruction by the integrated model of co-teaching. The Data Specialist ensures all students have the proper mandated number of minutes for ENL instruction and ENL teachers review the data on STARS classroom on a regular basis to make sure students are being serviced and scheduled properly. This data is reviewed ongoing throughout the school year. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 3. P.S.212 continues to have a stand alone ENL program for 180 minutes per week for students at the entering and emerging levels. Instruction is in English only. We do not have any Bilingual/dual language or Transitional Bilingual programs at this time. Content area instruction is taught by the ELL students' classroom teacher(s) along with the ENL teacher(s) in English for all ELL students for 180 minutes per week. ELL students are supported with instruction through the use of computers, bilingual books, dictionaries, the aid of promethean and smart boards and bilingual testing materials when available, hands-on learning, modeling as well as peer buddies and the new i-ready reading and math program. These methods help to aid with learning while keeping the students on par with their peers. Teachers are also given ENL instructional strategies which they are able to utilize in their classroom. When deemed appropriate a bilingual paraprofessional may be assigned to aid a student(s). All ELL students also receive daily ELA instruction in their classrooms through reading and writing workshops, Ready Gen, fundations and Go Math. In adapting their lessons for the ELL students in their classes, teachers activate prior knowledge, modify presentation of materials, and extend language. In addition, teachers adapt literature activities through the use of small group and individualized instruction, previewing text, mapping concepts using webs, and interactions with the promethean and smart board which is in every classroom in the school, as well as modifying daily and weekly writing pieces and adding the addition of the i-ready reading and math program. Our school has continued to incorporate the ELL “Cornerstone” curriculum by Pearson & Longman in our stand alone ENL program in order to make content comprehensible, enrich language development, and prepare students to meet standards. The components of the above program include 0  thematic units that focus on literacy through content areas (ELA, math, science, and social studies). Each unit is focused on a central theme, which ties together instruction and activities for each content area, with an emphasis on vocabulary. The series has built in reading strategies, sight and story words, word analysis, phonics, spelling, graphic organizers, grammar, writing modes and assignments, writing models, linguistics, differentiated instruction, as well as first/native language culture clues and background assistance for many languages. This series is designed for the English Language Learner to help develop English language skills and succeed in all academic studies and content areas. This series aligns with the common core learning standard. ENL teachers communicate with the ELL students’ classroom teachers through articulation and informal meetings to target individual students’ needs and help drive effective instruction. ENL teachers also have weekly grade preparation periods/meetings with classroom teachers to help align instruction and plan for co-teaching. In addition, the ENL teachers utilize some sheltered instruction methods to support content area instruction, including the use of multiple intelligences (e.g., songs and movement, hands-on projects), linguistically heterogeneous groups, alternate assessments, and activation of prior knowledge and experience. Furthermore, stand alone ENL instruction is also implemented through another ELL series titled, Rigby’s "On Our Way To English" in which there are leveled readers. This series is used to supplement our "Cornerstone" series. It contains phonics and word studies components, and writing instruction. The series focuses upon foreign students acclimating into their new environment. The students learn in a non-judgmental arena with aspects of the real world experience that new immigrants frequently encounter. The lessons are age and grade appropriate and encompass all levels of proficiency. The ENL teachers also have use of and access to the school literacy room, which enhances reading experiences for the ELL student. Students are always encouraged to fully participate and be engaged in all academic instruction. All ENL classrooms have computers connected to a promethean board with access to the Internet to reinforce lessons, connect students with visual cues, vocabulary, and technology. The promethean boards in the ENL classroom are touch accessible so that students can interact with the board along with their classmates. This enhances the language experience for ELL's by bringing language to life. ENL teachers foster native language support for the content areas by utilizing technology, including computers, Promethean boards, SMART boards, projectors, listening centers, bilingual books and dictionaries, as well as paraprofessionals. Lessons are aligned to meet New York State common core learning standards for grade level and content area instruction. Curriculum maps are online for all teachers to access and use. These curriculum maps are on the PS 212 website which is designed for all staff members to use. On our website all teachers and staff members can access curriculum maps by grade, view the stantards of framework for great schools, there is a unit for SWD's as well as ELL's plus much more. Whatever you need you can find on our website! 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 4. For ENL's who are stronger in their native language or need support in their native language, state tests and assessments are ordered and given (when available) to them in their native language along with an English language test, and/or the use of bilingual glossaries and dictionaries are given to assist the student. Students are given the native language test by the recommendation of the classroom teacher, ENL teacher and when able, student choice along with parental input/guidance. These tests are evaluated and graded by district level bilingual interpreters or in-house when available. Throughout the school year students are given the option of choosing reading books in their native language (when available) as well as bilingual dictionaries and glossaries to assist in comprehension. Students also have the use of technology to assist in language acquisition. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 5a. SIFE: Presently, we do not have any ELL Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE). In the event of the admittance of a SIFE student who is an ELL, the student would be placed in the ENL program according to placement procedures and parent choice; in addition, extra support would be given using ELL newcomer strategies to address the lack of language skills and education. Our goal is for these students to obtain basic communication and social skills in addition to academic content. Because SIFEs often lack grade level proficiency in content areas, we would work closely with the child’s classroom 1  teacher to give strong language support specifically in content areas in order to close the gaps in their academic achievement. The Home Language Information Survey along with the child/parent interview is used to assess SIFE status. SIFE students would also have the aid of the computer programs in place at P.S. 212 to help with bilingual instruction to ensure students comprehend instruction. Some of the programs available to teachers and students are: RAZ kids, Rosetta Stone, Imagine Learning, Learning A to Z, the use of ipads, Reading A to Z, Brain Pop, Brain Pop Jr., myon, flocabulary as well as building/floor level computer carts with laptops available. 5b. NEWCOMER: Newcomers to our program are given extra help in vocabulary and speaking. The two series we use for ENL instruction are "Cornerstone" and Rigby "On Our Way To English". At PS 212 there are numerous opportunities to incorporate technology into instruction. Some programs available are: RAZ kids, Rosetta Stone, myon reading, Imagine Learning, Learning A to Z, the use of ipads, Reading A to Z, Brain Pop, Brain Pop Jr., flocabulary as well as floor level computer carts with laptops available to teachers and students. The ENL curriculum include beginner level books for newcomers, which aid students in word recognition. The newcomer materials also include other components centered on themes of immigration experiences and native cultures. In addition, read alouds are provided to familiarize students with the sounds and rhythm of the English language as well as to expose all students to higher-level reading that they may not be able to access independently. For additional support, if the student feels he or she is more competent in their native language, we provide assessments in native languages as available for all content areas except ELA. In addition, we strive to familiarize the newcomers with ELA type learning strategies until the child reaches proficiency for his/her grade level. Students are also given numerous practice tests and assessments to familiarize them with the timing and procedures of state tests. Students are prepared well in advance for expectations and procedures of state wide testing so that there are no 'surprises' for them on testing day. This ensures students will not feel as nervous since they are already familiar with the testing procedures and content style of state testing. The newcomers in our program have the opportunity to use technology in order to aid their language acquisition through promethean board activities and instruction, listening/audio centers, as well as websites for word games, independent reading activities, native language literacy, and home activities. The differentiated instruction given throughout the day for all students within our school helps to determine the next steps needed for students to achieve success. Students levels are not just determined through testing measures. There are ongoing teacher assessments through observation, scaffolding, and challenging curriculum. Students move within levels in the classroom as needed and deemed appropriate. 5c. ELLS AT THE DEVELOPING LEVEL: For ELL's at a developing level instruction is provided through the reading and writing components of the "Cornerstone" Longman series as well as the Rigby "On Our Way To English" curriculum. The use of the P.S. 212 literacy room, and the help of the Academic Intervention reading and math teachers help to challenge these students and guide them towards the next level of success. Students are moved within groups on an ongoing basis. These students are helped through the use of visual literacy guidance which helps with understanding and clarity. Students prior knowledge and personal experiences are welcomed to help assist students with understanding and comprehension. Students are encouraged to present material orally to encourage communication in a social and academic setting. We are hopeful that using these communicative participation models, students will be able to become more confident and fluent in English, both in written and spoken modalities. We are confident that these strategies will extend their competence levels as well as assist them to their next steps academically. Developing level ELL's receive additional reading support through the use of technology (i.e. Promethean boards and computers), including listening activities, read-alongs, use of search engines to discover stories of different genres, and Internet research. At PS 212 we have the use of some outstanding technology. Some of these are Learning A to Z, Reading A to Z, ipads, flocabulary, RAZ kids, myon reading, Rosetta Stone, Imagine Learning, Brain Pop and Brain Pop Jr. Through the assistance of computer technology teachers can reach a deeper level of instruction for our developing level students. 5d. LONG-TERM ELLS: For Long-Term ELLs who have been in NYC schools for six years or more, we use formal and informal assessments ranging from NYSESLAT and state assessment performance to communication with the students’ classroom teachers in order to assess and identify the students’ areas of weakness. Accordingly, we strive to enhance their reading abilities by focusing on key topics for comprehension, organization of writing, looking for written context clues, and more expressive speaking. We encourage and support students to speak out loud and participate freely. We use many manipulatives along with technology to help address hands-on learning. In addition, long-term ELL students use the computer in the classroom in order to create published works – a method that assists students in participating in writing and editing which is faster, easier, and more fun. ANY ELL's with SPECIAL NEEDS: The ENL teachers, along with every service provider in the school, have received a copy of the IEP for every student they service who has been identified as having special needs. Each service provider is required to familiarize themselves with each student’s specific needs and modifications so instruction can be modified accordingly. In addition, the ENL teachers maintain consistent communication with the classroom teachers of ELL's with special needs in order to ensure 2  that each student’s needs are being addressed through instruction. One ENL teacher is also a licensed Special Education teacher. This additional training helps to supplement the needs of Special Education ELL students. ENL teachers use "Cornerstone" by Pearson/ Longman as well as the Rigby, "On Our Way To English" which are grade level curriculum. These series' have grade level appropriate stories, activities, leveled reading books, as well as CD's to help facilitate English language development. The books and stories in the series' contain a wide range and variety of content level information. Some of the areas the books touch upon are Social Studies and Science. The series also contains numerous thematic units which contain whole group reading and instruction, word study, small group instruction, writing components, newcomer level stories, audio CD's, themed projects, pair and group work, writing assignments for independent and group activities, as well as the use of computer work, assignments and assessments. The school participates in having a new reading skill each week. These skills are taught and reviewed throughout the school year both in the classroom by the classroom teachers, the ESL teachers and the AIS teachers. ELL students are also given a science cluster period to work on many hands-on activities in that content area. This science cluster teacher has a room that encompasses a fully working science lab. The lab affords students the opportunity to work in a hands-on environment. The school also has full-time math and reading AIS teachers and well as a SETTS teacher. This helps to reinforce the math and reading curriculum as well as help children progress to the next level. The math and reading programs used at P.S.212 are aligned to the NY common core standards. 5e. Students who have scored proficient on the NYSESLAT or have a level 3 on ELA State examination within the last two years are given numerous levels of support. Students are given ENL accommodations for state and classroom testing. These modifications are entitled to former ENL students and are continually implemented for two years after students have been determined proficient on NYSESLAT. Former ENL students are entitled to 90 minutes per week of ENL instruction with an ENL licensed teacher . 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The two stand alone ENL programs being used are "Cornerstone" by Longman and Rigby, "On Our Way to English". Both programs encompass all aspects of ENL levels of development. Books and lessons are leveled for grade and age appropriateness and are aligned with common core standards. These series contain front loading instruction, vocabulary, thematic organization, systematic skills development, phonics, word analysis, picture walks, writing pieces, built-in differentiated instruction, picture dictionaries, reading strategies, sight word vocabulary, spelling tips, graphic organizers, grammar, writing models and assignments, and using culturally and linguistically responsive teaching to enhance learning for all students including ELL's with disabilities. There are linguistic contrastive analysis areas for instruction. For newcomers the program provides emphasis on vocabulary and speaking. There are also specifically written book just for newcomers. These students also have access to technology through computers and listening centers. For ELL's that are in ESL 4-6 years the emphasis is on intensive reading and writing. These students will also have the use of technology to aid in language and reading fluency. Students may use search engines to do research or investigate genres of reading. Manipulatives are used to aid in hands-on learning, as well as the use of visual and listening opportunities are used to help reinforce skills. Content area instruction is done in class by the classroom teacher along with the ENL teacher. Instruction is supported through the use of Promethean and Smart boards, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, as well as native language reading books. Teachers are asked to incorporate to ENL strategies taught to them at the beginning of the year through professional development and ongoing throughout the school year to assist their ELL students. Materials for reading and math also available in the students native language to aid in understanding and comprehension. ENL teachers push-in to classrooms to co-teach with classroom teachers while implementing ESL methodologies and instruction. Some additional instructional components are: during stand alone instruction, there is a heavy concentration on literacy skills using the above programs, as well as providing the students with a print rich environment. These programs place an emphasis on all four modalities. The Rigby program also includes content area based libraries of leveled books. ENL along with classroom teachers implement the use of computers and internet in their classrooms. Some of these programs include, RAZ kids, Rosetta Stone, Imagine Learning, Learning A to Z, Reading A to Z, myon.com reading, ipads, flocabulary and building/floor computer carts and building/floor i-pads computer stations for our new i-ready reading and math support program. ELLs/ SWD are supported in the ENL program through a range of learning materials designed to address multiple learning modalities. In the stand alone ENL classroom as well as their 'home' classroom, ELLs with disabilities are supported through the use of visual aids, songs, word vocabulary cards, charts, picture cards, big book stories, stories on audio CDs, hands-on class work, manipulative charts, Total Physical Response (TPR) cards, mini-books, computer research and assignments, as well as the use of interactive promethean boards in all classrooms and 3  appropriate library reading leveled books geared towards the ELL student. Our ENL teachers also integrate technology for each subgroup of ELLs as outlined above. The Imagine Learning program we just ordered has a component specifically designed for ELL's that are struggling readers as well as students with disabilities. This program is research based and instructionally differentiated. They have a proven documented growth record for students to attain proficiency. They are able to help teachers monitor oral fluency and written responses. The program shows students progress day by day. They also have a decoding and blending activity component. ENL teachers utilize students' IEPs to develop lessons and address their long term and short term goals. For students with disabilities whose IEP's mandate bilingual instruction, these students are assigned a bilingual paraprofessional who can translate all instruction to their native language. ENL teachers are part of the IEP process, both at meetings and conferences. Students also receive the mandated amount of ENL instructional periods. For ELL students with disabilities whose IEP mandates ENL instruction, students are serviced with other students in the same grade for the mandated number of minutes. Alternate placement paraprofessionals are utilized to translate instruction when students are stronger in their native language. Paraprofessionals working one to one with students, provide them with individualized instruction they need to meet long term and short term goals. P.S. 212 employees a full time IEP teacher, Gail Hyman who works with the School Assessment Team to ensure all IEP goals and mandates are being met for ELL's -SWD. All service providers including ENL teachers, speech, OT, PT, guidance counselors, and adaptive physical education providers meet in the office of school assessment to coordinate schedules to ensure all students receive mandated services without overlapping as required by law. All teachers are given a copy of their students IEP to make sure goals and instructional planning is being properly met. Within the mainstream classrooms and stand alone ENL instruction, ELLs are supported through the use of ENL strategies implemented by the classroom teacher in English, which includes pictures to introduce new vocabulary and new concepts, songs and games, graphic organizers, role-playing, repetition, and modeling of skills. In addition, teachers are provided with ELL components of the reading program being used, which includes, ELL lesson plans and vocabulary cards and activities. Teachers and students are also able to support newcomers with native language support through the use of computers and Promethean boards which are located in all classrooms throughout P.S. 212. The use of the P.S.212 literacy room will ensure a wider variety of literature for the ELL student in which to be exposed. P.S. 212 believes achievement of the ELL child is our main objective. Any way we can support and assist our ELL population students we will strive to do it. At P.S.212 success of our students is our top priority. ELL's are grouped heterogeneously by age and grade level. Instruction for ELL students is aligned with New York State Common Core State Standards. Whether in the main classroom, during stand alone ENL instruction or during any supportive service program, the teachers at P.S.212 align instruction with proper age and grade level standards. ELLs are given support services throughout the school day. Lower grades are given a literacy based Fundations program; a phonics based reading program. This reading program has specific ELL components to facilitate language and reading acquisition. The basis of the lower grade reading program is to enhance phonemic awareness, spelling, comprehension, and listening skills. Upper grade ELL students are provided with a reading teacher who has push-in/pull-out small group reading instructional program. This program is taught by a New York State licensed reading provider. Students are also provided with a math teacher for academic intervention services. The program is taught by a NY state licensed math provider. Upper grade ELL students with disabilities are also given the Fundations/Wilson reading program. Students in upper grades work on phonics, listening, comprehension, as well as various areas of genre including fiction and non-fiction stories. P.S. 212 individualizes instruction for all students. This is especially important for the ENL student. Books and levels are chosen according to test data and in-class observation. Another great resource for our teachers is the PS 212 website. Available on this website are curriculum maps for all teachers to access and use. PS 212 website was designed for all staff members to use and have access to numerous resources available at our school. On our website all staff members can access curriculum maps by grade, view the standards of framework for great schools, view common core standards, F & P testing and leveling, UDL guidelines and facts, as well as any PD teachers have been to or provided for others to learn more about, there is also a link specifically for SWD's as well as ELL's plus much more. Whatever you need you can find on our website! s 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL's with SPECIAL NEEDS: The ENL teachers, along with every service provider in the school, have received a copy of the IEP for every student they service who has been identified as having special needs. Each service provider is required to familiarize 4  themselves with each student’s specific needs and modifications so instruction can be modified accordingly. In addition, the ENL teachers maintain consistent communication with the teachers of ENLs with special needs in order to ensure that each student’s needs are being addressed through instruction. One ENL teacher is also a licensed Special Education Teacher. This additional training helps to supplement the needs of Special Education ENL students. ENL students with disabilities attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment by placing these students into ENL grade level appropriate inclusion classes. ENL students with disabilities that require stand alone ENL services are taken with other ENL grade level students from regular education classes. Students IEP's are kept on file and are looked at in SESIS so all teachers have access to building upon the goals of the students individualized education plan. ENL teachers want to attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment for all our ENL population especially the ENL students with disabilities. Throughout the school day scheduling is done to incorporate self contained classes with regular mainstreamed classes. Preparation periods are mainstreamed for all students. Mainstream teachers, special education teachers and all students are involved in all aspects of educational and instructional planning. All regular and special education teachers meet to plan vertically and horizontally. All regular and special education teachers meet each week for grade level inquiry periods to review student work and plan for future instructional goals. ENL teachers use "Cornerstone" by Pearson/ Longman as well as the Rigby, "On Our Way To English" which are grade level curriculum. These series' have grade level appropriate stories, activities, leveled reading books, as well as CD's to help facilitate English language development. The books and stories in the series' contain a wide range and variety of content level information. Some of the areas the books touch upon are Social Studies and Science. The series also contains numerous thematic units which contain whole group reading and instruction, word study, small group instruction, writing components, newcomer level stories, audio CD's, themed projects, pair and group work, writing assignments for independent and group activities, as well as the use of computer work and assignments. These skills help to ensure the 'special-needs' ENL student will have the opportunity to discover a mode of learning that is helpful to him/her. By giving the students a wide range of learning and teaching opportunities we are confident that all children will have the advantage of picking the learning style that they respond best to. Students are in flexible groups with choices within the group. Students are mainstreamed with grade level peers. Students are taught side by side with other ENL children of the same grade with varying levels. Group work is changed daily and is given according to skill and strategy. Students often rotate group work throughout the week so that every child has the opportunity to work on a skill and project. Children's grouping is flexible and work given is grade appropriate. Our school has implemented the "Cornerstone" curriculum for our ENL program in order to make content comprehensible, enrich language development, and prepare students to meet standards. The ENL teachers communicate with the ENL students’ (general and special education) classroom teachers through informal and formal meetings to target individual students’ needs and IEP's, to help drive effective instruction. In addition, the ENL teachers utilize some sheltered instruction methods to support content area instruction, including a set classroom routine, the use of multiple intelligences (e.g., songs and movement, hands-on projects), linguistically heterogeneous groups, alternate assessments, and activation of prior knowledge. Classroom teachers and ENL teachers have use of the literacy room, which enhances reading experiences for the ENL student. All students are always encouraged to fully participate and be engaged in all academic instruction. All ENL classrooms have computers with access to the Internet to reinforce lessons, vocabulary, and technology. These 'extra' methodologies help to ensure all students (especially ones with special needs) are able to follow lessons and be motivated to learn. P.S. 212 has scheduling implemented to ensure students success by having as few pull-outs as possible. If at all possible service providers will push in to classrooms to work along with the teacher and student. By implementing this type of program we are hoping to have students with their classroom teacher as much as possible without disruption throughout the day. We are hoping to ensure the least restrictive environment for our ELL and former ELL population. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 5  By implementing a push-in, co teaching integrated program we are hoping to have students remain with their classroom teacher as much as possible without disruption throughout the day. This will help to ensure ENL students are receiving instruction in all the content areas. ENL teachers reinforce content based skills during differentiated instruction. ENL students are programmed for intervention support either through teacher/parent recommendation as well as through city and state wide tests and assessment results. Intervention services are given in English with the aid of computer bilingual translations when necessary and or bilingual dictionaries, glossaries as well as bilingual reading books. P.S. 212 offers math and reading intervention services. All services are provided in English. Some of the services provided for targeted students are small group reading, Fundations reading programs, AIS reading program, upper and lower grade small group math and reading instruction, speech and language, SETTS, as well as reading materials for all levels of students in many native languages in a literacy book room available to all teachers. The use of bilingual glossaries, dictionaries as well as technological bilingual services (i.e. computers/listening centers) aids in learning and communication/comprehension for the ENL student. P.S. 212 staff members are open to all new ideas and media available to aid in ENL's achievement and success. Staff development is ongoing and keeps staff and teachers abreast of all new concepts available to help ENL's become proficient in English. ENL's who have been identified as struggling in ELA and math (through test scores and teacher assessments/recommendations) receive Academic Intervention Services four to five times a week for one period each day. These services are provided in a small group pull-out and/or push-in setting by an AIS teacher. The AIS teacher articulates with the students’ classroom teacher in order to ensure alignment of instruction and a focus on the targeted students’ particular needs, as well as to monitor student progress. The ENL's receive additional reading support through the use of technology, including listening activities, read-alongs, use of search engines to discover stories of different genres, and Internet research. Some other technologies in use for intervention for ELL's are Learning A to Z, Reading A to Z, Raz kids, myon.com, bilingual test books for test preparation, flocabulary, Brain pop, Brain Pop Jr., Rosetta Stone and Imagine Learning. ENL's assessments are done formally and informally ranging from NYSESLAT and state assessment performances to communication with the students’ teachers in order to identify the students’ areas of weakness. Accordingly, we strive to enhance their reading abilities by focusing on key topics for comprehension, organization of writing, looking for written context clues, and more expressive speaking. We encourage and support students to speak out loud and participate freely. The above stated programs for our ENL students are given in English only but for all the computer/technology components many students are able to assess books and reading support in their native language as well as English. The addition of the new i-ready reading and math program provides individualized instruction for all students. The program meets students at their level and builds upon what they know to make sure students show growth throughout the school year. The teacher is able to monitor the growth and areas of weakness to support learning. In order to support proficient level students' academic intervention services are provided in areas identified as 'weaknesses' for the students. These support services may include, reading, math, speech and language, and/or Fundations instruction. The school programming aligns with the inclusion of support for ELL's including ENL services throughout the day while keeping the student(s) within their main classroom for all subject instruction. For the 2018-2019 school year we will also be incorporating the i-Ready reading and math computer program to target individual student needs. This program differentiates for each student meeting their individual needs and learning abilities. The program also provides feedback to the teacher for growth and measurement of students. This program is common core aligned. The program pinpoints student needs and monitors progress. The program individualizes instruction for each student. Students work at their level and build upon skills to progress at their own pace. There are also teacher lessons to help provide rigorous, grade level instruction as well as individual lesson instruction. Teachers have received training on using the instructional program and how to use the data to help each student progress throughout the school year. This data will help to drive instruction in the classroom by seeing where students need support and how students are progressing with each new skill taught. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? P.S.212 has used data from this year as well as from previous years to help guide instruction for the ELL student. The data has shown most ELL students struggle in the area of writing while also having some difficulty in the area of reading. Specific writing skills are being taught daily. The writing will focus upon responses to literature, text dependent questions, expressive, personal and persuasive writing pieces, writing narratives, cause and effort and using text dependent responses. These modalities of writing are being used to help the ELL student become a stronger and more confident writer. The use of the promethean board enhances learning for the ELL student. Hands-on accessible writing samples as well as instant feedback from technology affords an ELL student the extras they need to achieve success. Native language is used to help support ELL students throughout the day. The use of dictionaries, glossaries, bilingual reading materials as well as paraprofessionals (when 6  applicable). For testing accommodations, native language letters and tests (when available) aid in the support of ENL learning. P.S. 212 utilizes the data and trends to help determine personal goals for each student. We utilize the data to plan instruction through the backwards planning and design model. We focus on specific skills and strategies that will allow the ELL students to achieve the highest levels of success. We incorporate guided reading and writing groups as well as other assessment tools in our daily lessons. We utilize the data patterns from NYSESLAT to determine the improvements and programming for classrooms for the upcoming school year. P.S.212 evaluates the success of our ENL program by numerous measures. Teacher articulation about ENL students helps to keep academic instruction aligned. Classwork and participation, test results (MOSL), portfolios, conferencing and classroom observations and F & P are some of the methods used to evaluate the success of our ENL students as well as the effectiveness of the instructional programs being used. P.S.212 believes in wide and varied measures of evaluation that helps give a more complete picture of each ENL student and where their strengths and weaknesses lie. With these vast measurements, individualized instruction can be better attained to ensure success for our ENL students. In addition, all teachers are involved in school-wide professional development where they analyze the data, student work, MOSL outcomes and create curriculum maps. For the 2018-2019 school year we will also be incorporating the i-Ready reading and math computer program to target individual student needs. This program differentiates for each student meeting their individual needs and learning abilities. The program also provides feedback to the teacher for growth and measurement of students. This program is common core aligned. The program pinpoints student needs and monitors progress. The program individualizes instruction for each student. Students work at their level and build upon skills to progress at their own pace. There are also teacher lessons to help provide rigorous, grade level instruction as well as individual lesson instruction. Teachers have received training on using the instructional program and how to use the data to help each student progress throughout the school year. This data will help to drive instruction in the classroom by seeing where students need support and how students are progressing with each new skill taught. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? P.S. 212 does not have a bilingual program that was closed. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL's are involved in all school programs. Letters are sent home in native languages notifying parents of activities offered during the school day, supplemental and for after school. Students are given drama, dance, art, musical theater, technology, literacy, science and math. Students are immersed in all school activities to feel a connection to their peers and the school community. We also have an academic (reading and math) after school program for ELL students in grades 3 through 5. The after school program reinforces reading and math skills. Students are placed in a grade appropriate level setting. The skills being taught will in turn help ELL students on state wide tests in math and english. The program includes small group instruction. There is also a science after school program for fourth graders to support students for the upcoming state science exams. There are numerous other after school programs for our students which incorporate the arts such as theatre, cheerleading, dance, and art. These are open to all students including ELL's, letters are sent home in all languages to ensure involvement and access to all students. The 'arts' programs include cultural inclusion for all. These arts programs study and incorporate varying artists with exposure to cultural differences. The school also utilizes e-chalk which is a program designed for parent outreach. E-chalk will translate information from the school to the parents in over 30 languages. This program helps to ensure equal access to all school programs for all students. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Stand alone ENL classes have the use of two ELL programs, "Cornerstone" by Longman/Pearson and Rigby, "On Our Way to English". Both programs encompass all aspects of ELL levels of development. For newcomers the programs provide emphasis on vocabulary and speaking. These students also have access to technology through computers and listening centers. For ELL's 7  that are in ENL 4-6 years the emphasis is on intensive reading and writing. These students will also have the use of technology to aid in language and reading fluency. Students may use search engines to do research or investigate genres of reading. Manipulatives to aid in hands-on learning, as well as the use of visual and listening aides are used to help re-enforce skills. Content area instruction is done both in stand alone and through co-teaching daily. The instruction is supported with the use of Promethean boards, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, as well as native language reading books. Teachers are asked to refer to ENL strategies to better assist their ELL students. Some additional instructional components are:The "Cornerstone " and “Rigby: On Our Way to English” programs continue to prepare students to meet common core standards. During stand alone ENL instruction, there is a concentration on literacy skills using the above programs, as well as providing the students with a print rich environment. The programs place an emphasis on all four modalities of the NYSESLAT state test. The Rigby program also includes content area based libraries of leveled books. ESL teachers implement the use of computers in their classrooms. Each computer is hooked up to a promethean board to assist ELL students with visual comprehension. ELLs are supported in the ENL program through a range of learning materials designed to address multiple learning modalities. In the classroom, ELLs are supported through the use of visual aids, songs, overhead transparencies, word vocabulary cards, charts, picture cards, big book stories, stories on audio CDs, hands-on class work, manipulative charts, Total Physical Response (TPR) cards, mini-books, computer research and assignments, as well as the use of interactive promethean boards in all classrooms and appropriate library reading leveled books geared towards the ELL student. Our ENL teachers also integrate technology for each subgroup of ELLs as outlined above. The use of the P.S.212 literacy room ensures a wider variety of literature for the ELL student in which to be exposed. With the use of this literature students can read in English, as well as in some of their native languages to ensure support and continued growth in reading and academics. In order to aid the ELL student, the ENL teachers use numerous modalities to support native language for the ELL child. Through the use of computers, bilingual reading materials, bilingual test taking opportunities, as well as peer buddy/partner support. The ELL student has numerous opportunities to have native language support. P.S. 212 believes achievement of the ELL child is our main objective. Any way we can support and assist our ELL population students we will strive to do it. At P.S.212 success of our students is our top priority. ELL students are also afforded the use of computer carts on each floor which has laptops available for all students, there are also Smart/Promethean boards in EVERY classroom as well as smart tables in lower grades. Teachers have the use of incorporating RAZ kids, Rosetta Stone, myon.com, Learning A to Z, Reading A to Z, i pads, flocabulary, e-chalk, Brain Pop, Brain Pop Jr. and now Imagine Learning for ELL students. All teahcers have access to all these technologies including numerous ELL websites to assist with lessons and teaching for our ELL students. The technology is used for SWD's by giving them each a laptop for lessons that may pose difficulty. For assisting with ELL becoming more proficient we use the Imagine Learning programs which help to monitor growth for ELL's daily. Students are assigned RAZ kids reading as part of homework every night. These online books are leveled for students and are often in numerous languages to assist with comprehension and retention of skills. For the 2018-2019 school year we will also be incorporating the i-Ready reading and math computer program to target individual student needs. This program differentiates for each student meeting their individual needs and learning abilities. The program also provides feedback to the teacher for growth and measurement of students. This program is common core aligned. The program pinpoints student needs and monitors progress. The program individualizes instruction for each student. Students work at their level and build upon skills to progress at their own pace. There are also teacher lessons to help provide rigorous, grade level instruction as well as individual lesson instruction. Teachers have received training on using the instructional program and how to use the data to help each student progress throughout the school year. This data will help to drive instruction in the classroom by seeing where students need support and how students are progressing with each new skill taught. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? P.S. 212 offers a stand alone and co-teaching program for ELL's in English only. ELL students are supported through the use of ENL strategies implemented by all teachers in English, which includes pictures to introduce new vocabulary and new concepts, songs and games, graphic organizers, role-playing, repetition, modeling of skills and the use of technology. Teachers and students are also able to support and enrich native language with the use of the computer programs we have available and Promethean boards which are located in all classrooms throughout P.S. 212. The use of the P.S.212 literacy room ensures a rich variety of literature for the ELL student in which to be exposed both in English and their native language. With the use of this literature students can read in English, as well as in some of their native languages to ensure support and continued 8  growth in reading and academics. Through the use of computers and programs available to us such as: RAZ kids, Learning A to Z, Reading A to Z, myon.com, flocabulary, Brain Pop, Brain Pop Jr., Rosetta Stone, Imagine Learning, as well as ipads, bilingual reading materials, bilingual test taking opportunities, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries as well as peer buddy support native language support is given for all ELL students. P.S. 212 believes the achievement and progress of the ELL child is our main objective. Any way we can support and assist our ELL population students we strive to do it. At P.S.212 success of our students is our top priority. For the home-school connection we have the use of e-chalk which is able to translate into over 30 languages. This provides ELL students with home language support as well as supporting their families. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ELL's are grouped heterogeneously by age and grade level. Instruction for ELL students is aligned with New York State Common Core State Standards. Whether in the main classroom or an ELL students' self contained special education classroom, during ENL instruction or during any supportive service program, the teachers at P.S.212 align instruction with proper age and grade level standards. Support services are given throughout the day to all eligible students. At the beginning of the school year all Speech teachers, OT and PT teachers, SETTS teachers, ENL teachers as well as upper grade math and reading teachers meet and have a large sized schedule of each student in the school which is entitled to services. The schedules are filled in by time slot to ensure all stand alone and integrated services are met without the existence of an overlap. This ensures every child entitled to a required service will get the support and resources they need in the least restrictive environment. For academic support and services all teachers have the use of numerous technologies to ensure students success. For example, Imagine Learning is set up by levels for specific ages and grades. They will provide feedback which will help support ELL's in learning. Myon and RAZ kids has reading and learning opportunities by level, grade, grade and preferences for all students along with the support of bilingual assistance. Reading levels are assessed throughout the school year and groups are flexible to accommodate changes. Learning and Reading A to Z are programs that are leveled by age, grade and student interests. These programs also provide flexibility within them. Rosetta Stone is a reading program designed for reading fluency and progress by level, age, and grade. Curriculum maps are online for all teachers to access and use. These curriculum maps are on the PS 212 website which is designed for all staff members to use. On our website all teachers and staff members can access curriculum maps by grade, view the standards of framework for great schools, there is a unit for SWD's as well as ELL's plus much more. Whatever you need you can find on our website! This website ensures all staff members are 'in the loop' of educational standards and requirements by grade and level. For the 2018-2019 school year we will also be incorporating the i-Ready reading and math computer program to target individual student needs. This program differentiates for each student meeting their individual needs and learning abilities. The program also provides feedback to the teacher for growth and measurement of students. This program is common core aligned. The program pinpoints student needs and monitors progress. The program individualizes instruction for each student. Students work at their level and build upon skills to progress at their own pace. There are also teacher lessons to help provide rigorous, grade level instruction as well as individual lesson instruction. Teachers have received training on using the instructional program and how to use the data to help each student progress throughout the school year. This data will help to drive instruction in the classroom by seeing where students need support and how students are progressing with each new skill taught. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? P.S. 212 presently does not share a building (collocation) with any other school or program so all resources are available exclusively to our students. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The parent coordinator has outreach for parents of students eligible to enroll in PS 212. Mrs. Ilia Liff will have workshops throughout the year as well as meet and greets. The School Assessment Team does many turning 5 evaluations as well as pre-9  school assessments for incoming PS 212 students. The team consists of Lynette Vasquez, J. Figueroa, L. Cuiro, Leticia Peralta Irizarry. There are also speech teachers that are a part of the school assessment teams process, they are Sharon Dror, Lorraine Quinn, Sherin Elroby and Marissa Castro. These staff members will work collaboratively with IEP's, interventions as well as giving workshops for the community. We also have a pre-kindergarten workshop and meet and greet during the prior school year for the upcoming school year. During these workshops parents can meet the kindergarten teachers, ENL teachers, speech teachers and administration. They receive a packet with information they might find informative for the incoming school year. During this time parents will meet some of our bilingual staff members and can have a question and answer session where they can speak in their native language. This also helps when paperwork needs to be filed out for the upcoming school year. Parents are shown samples of paperwork and it is discussed in a non-formal environment with the assistance of our bilingual staff members. Our school also had the following social/academic events hosted in our school: reading night, math night, paint night, science night and family literacy night. The community is welcomed to join in the festivities and be a part of our school community. Flyers are given out and displayed in numerous languages so all the neighborhood is included.These evening get togethers are above and beyond what is required for the usual school day. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this time P.S.212 does not offer any language electives to ELL students. If at any time funding becomes available and parent interest is expressed we would be more than happy to offer a language elective(s). 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? At this time P.S. 212 does not have a dual language program in our school. If in the future parents express interest and we have 15 or more students of the same language in two continuous grades we will form a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. ELL along with all classroom and AIS personnel in our school have professional development every Monday from 2:20- 3:40 throughout the school year to ensure continued professional growth; part of these after school Monday professional development sessions are with a focus on our ELL population; in addition, staff receives support ongoing throughout the year for data by the in-house data specialist Maria Belkadi. These workshops include, but are not limited to, technical support , accessing and using data to plan instruction, compliance, and assessment training and scoring. In house professional development is given to all staff members including, principal, assistant principal, common branch teachers, ENL teachers, paraprofessionals (including bilingual paraprofessionals), guidance counselors, special education teachers, parent coordinators, and secretaries. Instructional leads receive ongoing training through the region which is then turn keyed to all staff members at P.S. 212. Some of this PD training is done at NYC and Fordam university which has regional ELL training from the state department of education bilingual department. There are professional development days for the return of staff members in September. These whole day workshops are administered to all the above mentioned staff in some of the following areas: Schoolnet, Stars Classroom, Go Math, Danielson's Framework, Curriculum and common core updates, Parent Engagement, Integration of content areas, MOSL and teaching and accommodating ELL's in the classroom. ENL teachers also go for out of house training given by the field support center Brooklyn South. These PD's are specifically targeted for ELL students and include co-teaching PD opportunities. ENL personnel attend yearly training for NYSESLAT scoring and 0  administration. School secretaries receive training in STARS and promotional criteria which include the ELL population. Other professional development for secretaries include transportation, students in temporary housing, ATS training, and training in reports needed for ELL students. Our school's guidance counselor receives professional development for Respect for All, child abuse training, crisis response, and anti-bullying. This PD is then turn-keyed to all staff members. Future professional development for the upcoming school year is slated to include aligning instruction in each grade with the Common Core State Standards, including curriculum mapping, Fundations Program, PBS Learning, MyOn websites, Imagine Learning, Rosetta stone, flocabulary, as well as other educational online reading programs, focusing on specific strategies that improve learning for ENL students as well as SWD's and more professional development on how to use technology within the classroom as well as how to use student data to plan and implement differentiated instruction. The classroom strategies and methodologies can then be implemented in daily instruction for the ELL population by the ENL teachers along with classroom teachers; in addition, the ENL teachers then turn-key our training to the rest of our school staff. Further professional development is achieved through on-line training and webinars provided by the board of education as well as outside agencies. School staff has been trained on the new i-ready reading and math programs. Teachers are aware of the lessons available to them and how to support students learning. They were also trained on how to use the data to drive instruction in their classrooms. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2. As per the state mandates all new teachers receive 7.5 hours of ELL professional development training while special education teachers receive 10 hours of ELL training. Professional development is done in numerous ways: ENL teachers turn key train in-house monthly throughout the school year, teachers are sent to the field support center in Brooklyn south for ongoing training, webinars are used for staff, staff members are sent to whole day workshops as well as Fordam and NYC universities for training by the state bilingual department of education. P.S. 212 has in the past and will continue to bring in outside resources for Professional development which consists of instruction in the latest methodology of ELL student support. Topics include the use of ENL strategies within the mainstream classroom to best aid in the achievement and success of the ELL student, co-teaching and resources for teaching ELL's. Some of this professional development is done on Monday's from 2:20 to 3:40 while other PD's are done during the school day while a substitute is called in to cover the class during this time. Other PD is done with the teacher(s) during instructional time with feedback and instruction provided during preparation periods and/or lunch. The PD which satisfy's the requirements of CR Part 154 totals 15% (ELL specific PD) for all teachers while ENL teacher receive at least 50% ELL specific PD throughout the school year. For all PD there are agendas as well as attendance records which are maintained in the office by the administration. Along with the agendas and attendance records, any monetary receipts spent for outside PD is kept along with the records in the main office as well. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Throughout the school year meetings are held (during the school day and on Tuesday's after school parent outreach designated times) for ELL parents. During these meetings parents are invited to come up to the school to meet in person or via phone to discuss their child's progress and goals. Bi-lingual interpreters (or over the phone interpretation services) are utilized to assist with native language for parents. A book is kept in the main office with a list of all ELL students in P.S. 212. At P.S.212 we know parent contact and communication is vital to achieve success for students. All ENL teachers use this book to verify and keep track of interactions with ELL parents. The book is marked off with a date next to each students name. This ensures that all ELL students receive individual contact with a teacher. Topics discussed with parents include but are not limited to academics, assessment results, progress, goal setting and plans for future proficiency. There are also meetings held throughout the year to keep parents involved and updated as to the ENL program and content area requirements. These 1  meetings are above and beyond the mandated parent teacher conferences. Parents are also able to access many websites to assist their child with language development and proficiency. This is done through the use of RAZ kids, Myon, Reading A to Z, Learning A to Z and Rosetta Stone. Also many teachers use 'remind' and 'e-chalk' to communicate with parents on an individual and ongoing basis. For ELL's that are SWD all teachers who interact with the student(s) are part of the IEP process and meetings. All teachers have access to SESIS and input goals and progress on IEP's. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2. In order to provide support to our parents, workshops are held throughout the year to keep parents abreast of school-wide activities and ongoing tests and assessments. Parents also receive all letters send home in their native language. Interpreters are available and hired to assist during all open school afternoon and evening sessions to help facilitate communication between the teacher, school and home. The parent coordinator also presents workshops for ELL parents with many hands-on activities keeping the home-school connection strong. PTA meetings are done throughout the year and with the assistance of parent-interpreters, ELL parents can partake in all school-wide functions. Translation signs are displayed throughout the lobby and in the main office to inform parents of the translation services available. To further support our ELL parents, ENL teachers provide parents on Thursday mornings from 8:15-9:15 am with English language instruction. These classes meet throughout the year and are geared to assist our ELL parents with attaining language proficiency and keep them connected to our school. At P.S.212 we are trying to make every effort to involve our ELL parents and help them to help their children and be a part of our school family. There are also parent/student nights throughout the year. These include, math night, literacy night, superhero night, paint night, science night, Dr. Seuss night, as well as many more. All these evening were created to help involve parents in our school in a fun and social setting. There are also breakfast with the principal mornings. During these breakfasts parents can learn about programs available to them and their children as well as expectations for their children. Parent Workshops are provided throughout the school year for ELL parents. These workshops are given by ENL teachers, AIS staff, special education staff members, guidance counselors, the school assessment team as well as the data specialist. Every Tuesday from 2:30- 3:35 is parent Involvement, during this time parents can make an appointment to come see the ENL teachers along with/or classroom teachers to discuss progress and areas for improvement. Teachers and parents can also have phone conferences if some parents have prior engagements. During these times there are available staff that can help with translation needs…if a staff member is unavailable or a language needed in not in-house the interpretation services by phone that are provided by the city are utilized. During parent workshops and outreach, the PTA is frequently present with bilingual interpreters in order to provide the parents with the opportunity to become more involved in school-wide activities. Staff members are also present to keep ELL parents abreast of services available to them and their children. Furthermore, Ilia Liff, our parent coordinator, facilitates our school's interaction with parents through numerous outreach. She provides ongoing communication by being present at all PTA meetings and community education council meetings, the principal's breakfast, etc. She encourages parents to become involved in school events. She also distributes a bi-monthly school newsletter and communicates with parents via the internet. She utilizes the school messenger telephone system to relay all important news events to parents. Ms. Liff also conducts parent workshops as part of the outreach program in our school. Throughout the school year, children participate in performances with their classes and grades, during these times ELL parents are welcomed to come and see their children perform. Invitations for these events are sent home in parents native language so they are informed of the time and date of all school performances. During parent breakfasts, PTA meeting, parent workshops, individual meetings and adult ENL classes, parents discuss their needs and what they want to see in our school. The school makes every effort to accommodate parent(s) wishes when they are able. The school also has staff meetings to discuss various ways to get and keep our parents and community involved. 2  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. At P.S. 212 we have a very strong outreach to the community. Throughout the school year we have numerous outreach projects. Some of the things that are school wide and involve participation of ELL students are food drives, clothing drives, coat drives, donations such as penny harvest, book swaps, electricity conservation contests, recycling projects and books for tots are a few of the community projects we are involved in. The students are eager to participate and often make signs to display around the building highlighting each benefit drive that is active at the time. Also there are many clubs in the building that involve participation from our ELL population such as cheerleading, dance, art, drama, science and gym. These clubs are during the school day and after school as well. Students discuss their wants and needs with teachers and administration and whenever possible these clubs are formed accordingly. We are also proud to have a koala store. Students help run and manage the store and earn koala dollars to purchase items in the store. This initiative was done as a school. Students participated in voting for a mascot, creating the mascot along with the rules of earning koala dollars. This is a school wide participation program that promotes kindness, inclusion, ethics and goodness in our school. Children not only try to do their best but they want to go above and beyond to earn koala money. The store has created great excitement for the school. At P.S. 212 we believe in having great KOALITIES! This is evident as you walk around our building. The school also has 'fun Friday'. Every Friday teachers plan exciting and fun lessons for their students. For one to two periods students get to participate in a classroom activity geared toward their curriculum and learning from the week. Students look forward to these fun Fridays--teachers enjoy them as well! The staff and students also participate in wearing their koala shirts the first Wednesday of every month. These school spirit days bring our school family closer together. Students are given a koala shirt by the PTA so that this is a school wide activity. 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Rina Horne, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Rina Horne Helen Stern Ilia Liff Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Bonnie Merone ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Kelly Isaccson, ENL Teacher/Subject Area Elina Ivenkova, ENL Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Jessica Nunno School Counselor Isabel DiMola Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Lynette Vasquez Other Bilingual SAT Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 21K212 School Name: The Lady Deborah Moody Superintendent: Isabel DiMola The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Illia Liff Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At registration, all parents and guardians must fill out the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) with an ENL teacher. During the registration process parents will meet with one of the ENL pedagogues: Bonnie Merone, Elina Ivenkova or Kelly Isaacson. They conduct an interview with the parent(s) and child. When necessary, native language support is utilized to aid the interview process--either through an in-house interpreter or through the over-the-phone interpretation services provided by the NYC Department of Education. Notes from the interview are recorded on a form and attached to the student's HLIS and placed in the students' cummulative file; a copy is also kept in the main office. ENL teachers are mindful of checking the portion (Part III) of the HLIS to help give a clearer indication of language ability/instruction. At this time eligibility results are entered on the student’s HLIS along with the OTELE codes and the HLIS is signed off by the pedagogue. Based on this initial screening process and the parent choice of English or native language communication, this information will be input into ATS under the direction of the ENL pedagogue. The RAPL is then printed and kept on file in the main office to be easily 6  accessed by staff. Depending upon parent choice of language, all communication from the school will be in the preferred oral and written language of the parent. The native language of choice for parents is also kept within the students cumulative folder for reference by the teacher as well as other staff members. If the child were to transfer to another school, the information would be readily available. The child's HLIS is also kept on file in the students cumulative record card. Attached to the HLIS form is the parent correspondence form, the parent selection form and the interview notes from registration. Our school uses many ATS reports to assist in the parent and school connection such as RCPL, RECF (for student emergency), RCON, RADL and RHBG. All of these ATS reports help the school to be informed of parent preferences for language, contact as well as emergency information. These reports are utilized by all staff members and are kept on file in the main office. At the beginning of the school year, teachers give parents a survey to indicate their preferred oral and written language of communication. They are kept on file in the main office. All newly registered students are given the survey at registration to ensure oral and written communication are in their preferred language. The school shares the Language Survey with all staff members during staff meetings as well as during parent teacher conferences. This data helps to provide language needs for meetings, PTA comunication, parent-teacher conferences and workshops. This information is also kept in the photo copy room so that the aide's can make appropriate copies for the parents in the languages requested. All the languages are listed by class and grade and are updated bi-monthly. Report cards are sent home to parents in their native language to ensure a strong school-parent connection. The information is presented to parents in their native language to ensure they understand and are able to play an active role in their childs’ education. The parent coordinator also presents workshops for ENL parents with many hands-on activities keeping the home-school connection strong. She makes every effort to have all information available to parents in their native language. The parent coordinator also helps to provide native language literature available to ENL parents during AIS/ENL parent workshops. PTA meetings are held throughout the year with the assistance of parent-interpreters. ENL parents can partake in all school-wide functions. Translation signs are displayed throughout the lobby and in the main office to inform parents of the translation services available. The blue emergency cards in the office also indicate the parents’ preferred oral and written language for communication. All teachers and staff members have access to these cards and can then provide parents with the language assistance they need either through in-house staff interpreters or the DOE interpretation services. We also determine the needs from parents and families that attend mandatory orientations and open houses. Staff members are also available to translate (when applicable) to keep ENL parents abreast of services available to them and their children. Our staff has many bilingual teachers that can help with translation services. Some of the languages staff member speak are; Russian, Urdu, Arabic, Spanish, Hebrew, Chinese, Italian and Bengali. To further support our ENL parents, ENL teachers provide parents with English language instruction classes on Thursdays from 8:15-9:15 am. At P.S. 212 we are trying to make every effort to involve our ENL parents and assist them to help their children and be a part of our school family. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Percent Oral Chinese Spanish Arabic Urdu 155 86 24 19 21.2% 12.2% 3.2% 2.6% Preferred 154 87 24 19 21.1% 11.9% 3.2% 2.6% 7  Russian Bengali Portugese Haitian Ukranian Albanian Georgian Hungarian Vietnamese 10 6 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1.3% .8% .2% .2% .1% .1% .1% .1% .1% 10 6 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1.3% .8% .2% .2% .1% .1% .1% .1% .1% English 0 0 419 0 0 57.5% 0 0 419 0 0 57.5% 0 0 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. The languages that represent a 10% population of our school are Chinese and Spanish, but they are excluded from the question. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families ELLs Entitlement/ Non-Entitlement/ Continuation Letters Each Month PTA sponsored events Throughout the year Parent Teacher Conference Announcements September/ November/ March/ May Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We use DOE template(s). We use bi-lingual staff; DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages, and translation vendor for translation into non-covered languages We use DOE internet template(s) for covered languagues; we use school based personnel and/ or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. 8  School Sponsored Events Throughout the year Shows and Concerts Throughout the year Pre-K/ K and 5th Grade Graduation Announcements June New York State Testing Dates March/ April/ May Letters from school leadership Throughout the year We use bi-lingual staff; DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages, and translation vendor for translation into non-covered languages We use bi-lingual staff; DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages, and translation vendor for translation into non-covered languages We use bi-lingual staff; DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages, and translation vendor for translation into non-covered languages We use bi-lingual staff; DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages, and translation vendor for translation into non-covered languages We use bi-lingual staff; DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages, and translation vendor for translation into non-covered languages 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Meet The Teacher September 13, 2017 Parent Teacher Conferences November 15, 2017 March 14, 2018 Family Math Night January 11, 2018 Family Literacy Night May 23, 2108 PTA Meetings CEC Meetings Monthly Monthly interpretation service(s)? We us bilingual school staff and over-the-phone interpretations services. We use bilingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages and over-the-phone interpretation services. We use bilingual school staff, over-the-phone interpretations services and parent volunteers. We use bilingual school staff, over-the-phone interpretations services and parent volunteers. We use parent volunteers as well as over the phone interpretations. We use parent volunteers. 9  Paint Night May 25, 2018 Science Night March 21, 2018 Breakfast With The Principal Monthly beginning in October Literacy Workshops Ongoing throughout the year Middle School Open House Monthly Cooking Workshop April Academic Intervention/ Special Education Workshops Ongoing throughout the year We us bilingual school staff and over-the-phone interpretations services. We us bilingual school staff and over-the-phone interpretations services. We us bilingual school staff and over-the-phone interpretations services. We us bilingual school staff and over-the-phone interpretations services. We us bilingual school staff and over-the-phone interpretations services. We us bilingual school staff and over-the-phone interpretations services. We us bilingual school staff and over-the-phone interpretations services. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In an event of a school emergency, our school sends out text messages using the Remind program, which can be translated into multiple languages. Robo calls are used to instantly inform parents of any school emergencies. When available in-house staff members will assist in phone calls to parents in their preferred language. Additionally, each teacher has a list of the parents preferred language of communication along with his or her phone numbers. We have also incorporated the use of Echalk, which is a method of communication to be used with the parents via phone, or computer that can translate messages into over 30 languages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During a school-wide meeting in September, the Language Access Coordinator will turnkey the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 as well as what resources are available to them to meet compliance through an interactive PowerPoint presentation which includes the actual document. In January a reminder memo is sent out that reiterates the details of this meeting. The NYC DOE multilingual poster hangs in the Main Office and in the lobby with the Translation and Interpretation Units phone number clearly displayed for both parents and staff alike. The ENL staff has also conveniently placed a label with the Translation and Interpretation Unit’s phone number on every phone with an outside line throughout the school building. Additionally, there is a list of all multilingual staff members in the office should assistance be needed in person. Parents are also sent translated notices at the beginning of the year which notifies them of their rights and the resources available to them to receive information in their preferred language from the school. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 0  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In order to make parents aware of their right to receive information in their preferred language, NYC DOE’s multilingual poster is displayed in the main office and lobby with the DOE’s Translation and Interpretation Unit’s phone number clearly displayed. Additionally, a smaller version of the poster is visible on the counter of the Main Office, which allows them to easily point to their preferred language during registration or any other school visits. This allows staff to quickly and efficiently identify the best language for communication. Furthermore, when parents register their child they receive the NYC DOE’s Parent’s Guide to Language Access which informs them of their right to obtain general information on the Department of Education’s programs and services in Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian and Urdu at schools.nyc.gov and by calling 311. The brochure also provides parents with an “I Speak” card in the aforementioned languages for the parent to bring with them when they visit the school in order to show a staff member to receive assistance in their preferred language. In September, January and April a letter is sent home to parents in the preferred language of written communication that they identified on the Blue Card and HLIS which describes their right to have any and all information disseminated by the school in their preferred language. It also asks parents to re-specify their preferred written and oral languages of communication. This information is then input into ATS on an ongoing basis for future referral. Additionally, it states to call the Parent Coordinator in the event that they are not receiving information in their preferred language; this number is listed on the letter. All school staff receives a class list, which indicates all parents’ preferred languages of written and oral communication. It is made clear in a memo provided along with the list those teachers must provide information in the languages indicated. The ATS reports are also printed and kept in the office for all staff to reference. The parent bill of rights is displayed in the main office on a bulletin board when you first walk in. It is displayed in each language with a ‘welcome-hello’ sign in the corresponding language. This allows parents to read through, in their native language, what their rights are. In September during the ‘Meet the Teacher’ event, ENL staff alongside in-house and off-site interpreters explains to parents their right to receive information in their preferred language. All parent engagement events have in-house and off-site interpreters in the main languages spoken within our school. Interpreters hold up translated signs in the languages they speak at the beginning of each event, which invite parents to join them during the event if they wish for translation services. Additionally, when parents sign into these events they must indicate which language they would like to receive the information in. Before an event takes place, if there is no interpreter in the building for a requested language, a staff member will contact the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit to assist the parent throughout the event. P.S.212 makes every effort to keep communication between parent, child and teacher as open as possible. The Learning Environment Survey is examined by the administration to determine the needs and concerns of ENL parents. The administration makes every effort to keep ENL parents involved and connected to our school. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? P.S. 212 sends home parent learning surveys each year in June in their preferred language of communication which request feedback on the language services that they received throughout the school year. Parents answer questions based on their feelings and experiences. At the bottom of the survey parents list questions and concerns that they have about the language services they received. These surveys are sent home to the parents to fill out and are returned sealed. ENL staff and interpreters as needed review surveys and compile the data. The ENL staff then 1  analyzes the feedback to determine future improvements to the language services provided within the school. The parent coordinator meets with parents on a monthly basis to discuss updated procedures that are going on in the school as well as new information regarding upcoming events. The PTA frequently holds meetings throughout the school year to discuss any concerns or questions parents have. Parents also can schedule conferences with their child’s classroom teacher, service provider(s) and administration to voice any opinions they have regarding their child and schoolwork. P.S 212 staff members have websites that are created for each class individually; here parents are not only welcome to see what information is posted but also leave any questions/concerns/comments. Parents are always welcome to send letters to the teachers about any concerns or questions they may have. Feedback from the parent surveys are analyzed to see where we need improvement and expand upon areas we are strong in. This feedback is shared with all staff members during professional development days. In addition to analyzing the results, staff members are encouraged to follow up with any classroom/teacher issues on an individual basis. 2 
