 18K219 School Name: P.S. 219 KENNEDY-KING Principal: WINSOME SMITH   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information 219K – The Kennedy King School 331800010219 PK - 5 School Number (DBN): 18K219 1060 Clarkson Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11212 929-397-6566 Phone Number: 929-397-9565 Fax: Winsome Smith wsmith4@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 18 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Winsome G. Smith Michael Jacobs NickeishaCampbell-Hunt N/A MaudlineCameron N/A District Information Beverly Wilkins Superintendent: 1106 East 95 th Street bwilkin@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-566-6008 Phone Number: 718-649-7074 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn South MauriciereDegovia FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 East 89 th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11209 MDegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-3952 Phone Number: 718-759-4879 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Winsome Smith Michael Jacobs NickeishaCampbell-Hunt N/A MaudlineCameron N/A N/A N/A Kathy Alecia Marline Salvat Andrea Gooden Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent   Name AlishaCarthy AneesahStewart Tricia Gittens-Haynes Dianne HilaireNewton N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? OUR VISION Section 4: CEP Overview Our vision is to promote strong home/school partnerships which will enhance our students’ abilities to respect, appreciate and embrace all cultures. Through differentiated instruction and an enriched curriculum, we strive to maximize opportunities in order for every child to experience success. We endeavor to become “creative” with how to remediate struggling students in order to ensure students’ progress and success in all domains of development.   OUR MISSION PS 219 stands as a perfect example of how a whole can become more than the sum of its parts. Although we have staff that varies in experience and cultural background, we share a common vision that focuses our efforts on improving student achievement. Our shared experiences result in a school culture built around the joint responsibility of community and school to educate our children so that they may become college and career ready. Our Motto, “Achieving Excellence” expresses this commitment and is representative of our school culture. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. COMMUNITY PS 219 is dedicated to providing a safe and nurturing environment in which all children will achieve academic excellence and develop social responsibility. We are located in the East Flatbush neighborhood of Brooklyn, New York with a student population of 539, serving students from Pre-kindergarten to Grade 5 in a child-centered stimulating learning environment. We offer classes for grades Pre-K to 5, with collaborative team teaching and special education classes on most grades. Our staff includes one Principal, one Assistant Principal, 40 teachers, who are 100% fully licensed and qualified, eight support personnel, one full-time and one 2-day F-Status Secretary, 20 Paraprofessionals, one Parent Coordinator, and two Guidance Counselors (one full-time and one-part time). Our School-Based Support Team is comprised of one Social Worker, one Psychologist, one Family Assistant, two speech teachers (two full-time) one Occupational Therapist, one Physical Therapist, one SETTS teacher, one English as New Language teacher, one Individualize Education Plan (IEP) Teacher, and two Learning Leaders. The building, erected in 1924, has four floors and incidentally is “C” shaped demonstrating our Character, Commitment to Children, and serving our Community. Our special classrooms are a Library/Multimedia Center, housed on the fourth floor, two gymnasiums, located on the third and fourth floors respectively, one computer lab, one auditorium and one cafeteria. Our school climate is collaborative and is comprised of a dedicated community of learners. All members of the school community are actively involved in the education of our children. UNIQUE and IMPORTANT CHARACTERISTICS Our students come to us with different backgrounds, experiences and needs. We capitalize on their strengths and provide access to all of their needs. We believe students flourish in an environment in which they feel safe and one that is aesthetically pleasing. We encourage respect for all. While many students are of Caribbean descent and recent immigrants to the country, we have also welcomed students from the continent of Africa, Haiti, Dominican Republic, Central America and Yemen. 85% of the student population is Black/African American. STRATEGIC COLLABORATIONS/PARTNERSHIPS and/or SPECIAL INITIATIVES Supplemental Academic Instruction: P.S. 219 conducts an Extended Day Program for selected students in grades 3-5 ELA and Mathematics each year. Additionally, we offer a Title III ENL after School program for ELLs in grades 3-5 and a Title III Immigrant and ENL after School Program for students in grades 1-2 Music Program: P.S. 219 has a full-time music teacher provides music instruction to grades PK-5 and a long-term partnership. Grades rehearse and perform Broadway type productions simulating shows such as Frozen, Annie, 0  Cinderella, etc. Studio provides staff and family workshops and celebrates with year-end permanent installations and exhibitions. Studio in a School: Studio in a School provides visual arts instruction to students in grades K-5. Girl’s Club: Girls in this club meet once a week to engage in planned activities designed to bolster their self-esteem and build their social, emotional and academic skills. NY Center on Aging: "Grandmothers" volunteer full-time as teaching aides in classrooms in grades K-2. Technology Club: Two students are selected from every classroom to assist their teacher with technology in their classroom, and attend special trainings, participate in special technology projects, and go on tech-related field trips, such as to Apple and Microsoft to further their expertise. Imagine That Chess: Students in grades 1-5 will receive chess instruction weekly during lunch from October to March. Noel Pointer Foundation Stringkiz Violin: Select students in grades 2-3 receive violin class with a professional violinist. University Settlement: Our community-based OST partnership welcomes low income and new immigrant families to its free after school and summer program. Some of the services offered includes: homework help; sports and fitness; academic enrichment; crisis Intervention; services of teens; and suppertime. Literacy classes, counseling and Mental health services and child care training and referral for adults within the community. Tennis Club: We are partnered with the NY Tennis League to provide after school tennis program. Boy Scouts: Boys participate in an active Boy Scouts after school program. Sensory Room: We have a special room designed to develop a person's sense, usually through special lighting, music, and objects. It is used as a therapy center for students with limited socio-emotional skills. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have two integrated co-teaching classes on grades 4 and 5. There are also five 12:1:1 Special Education classes on grades K-5. We have an English as a New Learner (ENL) Pullout Program for students with limited English proficiency. There is one full-time teacher to meet these needs. Additionally, there is an after school program for ELL students in grades 3-5. Our special student populations demonstrate particular instructional needs in order to successfully meet academic standards. In order to meet those needs, lessons include extensive modeling, use of visual aides, quality questioning and discussion techniques, extended wait time, precise expectations, differentiation, scaffolding, use of manipulatives, multiple entry points, hands-on learning, TPR (total physical response) and continuous formative and summative assessment to track progress and affect instructional adjustments. Teachers receive professional development around enhancing rigor for these instructional strategies. Parent workshops are conducted to familiarize parents with the curriculum and strategies they may use to support their children at home. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. One element of the Framework for Great Schools in which we experienced success was in Effective School Leadership where clear expectations were set in the following ways: 1     School leaders identified the problem of practice (POP), which was Planning and Preparation, and created professional development to support the these issues. School leaders implemented systems and structures for the ongoing collection, monitoring and reviewing of assessments from all core subjects. School leaders provided a Teacher Handbook with school-wide protocols. One element in the Framework for Great Schools which can be highlighted as an area of focus is Rigorous Instruction. Teachers will be provided with professional development on Danielson 3A and 3C to ensure classrooms have high levels of student engagement and differentiated instructional strategies that are aligned to students' needs. We utilize Journeys for our ELA curriculum, which is supplemented with Newela, and Go Math for our math curriculum, which is supplemented Mathletics. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 18K219 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 534 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 83 83 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 49 39 14 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 78.0% % Attendance Rate 75.8% % Reduced Lunch 9.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.7% 9.6% 2.1% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 16.71 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 27.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 86% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 27 29 89.7% 0.9% 22.1% 85.0% 2.2% 1.1% 2 5% 5.7 25.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, areas of strength for P.S. 219 were in the Common Core Shifts in Literacy and Math. The Literacy resources, Journeys in K-3 and Ready Gen paired with Newsela in 4-5, supported the teachers in providing Rigorous Instruction and allowed for opportunities to build students’ knowledge through content rich non-fiction. These resources also included opportunities for reading and writing experiences grounded in evidence from text, both literary and informational. The Math resources, Go Math integrated with Mathletics and Number Talks, allowed teachers to focus deeply on the concepts emphasized in the standards to help students build strong foundations for learning. Students’ conceptual understanding, procedural fluency, and their ability to apply math in context was also enhanced because of these resources. Based on the same School Quality Guide, an area of priority is Quality of Student Discussion. When discussion was taking place in class, students were having difficulties building on each others' ideas. Students were also exhibiting difficulties using data or text references to support their ideas. The school will incorporate Accountable Talk to address these deficiencies. The teacher handbook and professional development sessions will support the teachers in ensuring that Accountable Talk is implemented successfully. In every classroom, Accountable Talk stems will be posted and accessible to all students. Students will also have access to Mathematics Discourse Cards where students will have questions and sentence starters to engage in meaningful mathematical conversations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 3% increase in proficiency in Math and ELA as measured by the NY State Exams. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Use evidenced-based instructional All Grades programs, Journeys, Go Math, Amplify Science and Passport to Social Studies  Mathletics online learning program for grades K-5  Newsela is an instructional content platform that super charges reading engagement and learning in every subject  Development and implement vertically-aligned Pacing and Assessment Calendars Strategies to address needs: All Grades  Ensure lessons are differentiated and scaffolded  Use the RTI Framework to ensure students individual needs are met  Emphasize and develop comprehension skills and strategies through Read Alouds, Guided Reading, Shared Reading and Independent Reading activities  Provide small group and one-to-one instruction in reading comprehension strategies  Teachers will deliver questions that lead to multiple opportunities for September 2018 to June 2019 Classroom Teachers Support Staff Administrators September 2018 to June 2019 Teachers Support Staff Administrators 5  student to answer questions related to course content in manner that is congruent with student ability to demonstrate mastery of course standards   Teachers will use Webb’s Depth of Knowledge to generate questions Student will continue to use accountable talk prompts Formative and summative assessment data that will be used to inform instruction and assist students in academic goal setting  Teachers will use Hess’ Cognitive  Rigor Matrix to develop higher level tasks  Technology will be integrated into lessons to ensure excellent modeling, multiple entry points and hands-on learning  Develop and implement a All Teachers professional development calendar around rigorous instructional strategies and data driven instruction  Provide professional development program with an emphasis on quality questioning and discussion techniques using the anchor text, "Quality Questioning".  Provide professional development through CITE to explore Socratic questioning   Selected students will attend after school Extended Day instruction for ELA and Math in grades 3-5. Focus will be on test preparation, pending funding availability Selected students from Grades 1-5 will be offered opportunities for extended day instruction. Students will be grouped according to levels and areas of strengths and needs. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 2018 to June 2019 Select students February 2019 to June 2019 6  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school engages families in supporting their understanding our expectations around rigorous instruction and the Common Core: Monthly/On-going:  Weekly Parent Tuesdays: On Tuesdays, parents are invited to meet with school community. Parents will be kept abreast of activities through Monthly Calendar and Class Dojo. Parents are invited to activities as they occur.  Class Dojo Communication  Parent Worskhops  Grade performances September:  Parent Orientation/Curriculum Night with all staff members and ELL parent meeting October:  Parent Title I meeting with selected teacher, parent coordinator, administration and other key personnel November:  Parent Teacher Conferences February:  Health Fair March:  Parent Teacher Conferences May:  Parent Teacher Conferences  Special Education Curriculum Fair June:  Art Show Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 7  Mid-Winter Academy  6 Teachers: 4 hours per day for 3 days  1 Administrator: 5 hours per day for 3 days  1 Health Aide: 4 hours per day for 3 days Title III ENL After School Program  1 Teacher: 2 hours per day for 23 days  1 Administrator: 1 hour per day for 23 days Title III Immigrant Program  4 Teachers: 8 hours per day for 17 days Spring Academy  6 Teachers: 4 hours per day for 3 days  1 Administrator: 5 hours per day for 3 days  1 Health aide: 4 hours per day 3 days  ReadyNY  Mathletics  Newsela Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded X In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point benchmarks assessments are given for Journeys, Go Math and Fountas & Pinnell Reading Levels, as well as special education progress monitoring by February. The assessment results will be reviewed and measured against rubrics, and reflection protocols developed for both staff and students. Results will be broken down into concepts/components and analyzed to depict class and grade-wide trends. These will be compared to the baseline assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Interim assessments are given at the beginning-of-the-year, middle-of-the-year and end-of-the-year for Journeys, Go Math and Fountas & Pinnell. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 93% of teachers state that students are safe in their classes. We have strong adult supports in our classrooms in the forms of paraprofessionals and foster grandmothers. As a result, we had 82% of teachers that stated that adults in their school help students develop the skills they need to complete challenging coursework. Our students have a safe and supportive classroom environment. P.S. 219 also have Tech Lead students which allows students with skills and opportunities to be leaders. An area of priority need is in Classroom Behavior. We have a 31% decline compare to the District Average and a 40% decline compare to the City Average. Teachers have stated that students have difficulties in class when listening to directions and they do not behave well in class even when the teacher isn’t watching. To tackle these difficulties, the school has implemented an Aspiring Mentors program where students are mentored by teachers to take ownership of their learning and to develop leaders abilities that can be applied in all situations to help with their behaviors. To monitor behaviors we will utilize ClassDojo, which will help students self-monitor their actions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the remaining 21% of our teachers will be trained in Restorative Justice practices so that 100% of our teachers will be trained and implementing Restorative Circles, resulting in a decrease in the number of incidents reported in OORS. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All Students September Teachers 2018 to June 2019 Parent Coordinator ● Liaise with Parent Coordinator for community service projects such as Penny Harvest ● Respect for All Week  Attendance Awards and Incentive Program  Anti-bullying Workshop  Focusing on behavior management strategies, behavior contract, review Chancellor’s Regulations.  Distribute Parent Handbook  Pre-Kindergarten Social Work/SW and Family Worker will conduct workshops throughout the school year  P.S. 219 Cultural Diversity Day where we honor our unity in diversity  Provide Interpretation and Translation services Special Education Days for parents and students  All Students February 2019 Organization Community Based Organizations All Teachers Student Parents Students Parents September 2018 to June 2019 DOE Personnel Legal Counsel Parent Coordinator Educational Consultant Restorative Justice  Six Teachers will be trained in on Restorative Justice across six sessions in October and November  One Teacher will be trained across six session in January Teachers and February  Teachers will integrate Restorative Justice practices into daily routines and weekly Restorative Circles 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 0  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Information about safety, school culture and discipline are shared through a Parent Handbook at the beginning of the school year. Information is also shared throughout the school year at Tuesday Parent Conferences, PTA meetings and phone calls. This will be done from September 2018 to June 2019 by Administration, Teachers, Parent Coordinator and PTA members. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Curricular materials for Restorative Justice will be provided by the District office. Human Resources: Assistant Principal, Grade 5 Teachers, Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator, PK Social Worker Instructional Resources: Restorative Justice Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the school year's midpoint in February 2019, all teachers will be trained in Restorative Justice and formerly training classroom teachers will have been teaching Restorative Justice weekly since the beginning of the school year. We will review data in Office of Youth and Safety Development Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS), such as the Incident Location Summary, Hourly Analysis, Incident Level, and Infraction Summary, and compare the data to last year's end-of-year reports. ATS Attendance reports will be also be reviewed and compared to last year's end-of-year reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument that will be used is the Office of Youth and Safety Development Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) and the Special Education Student Information System (SESIS). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Quality Review (2017-18):  Indicator 4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership Development: The majority of teachers engage in grade-level or school-wide inquiry-based teams. Teachers consistently analyze their students’ performance data to identify learning gaps. Teachers’ exploration of student performance data and teaching strategies strengthens their instructional capacity and typically results in progress toward school goals for groups of students. School Quality Guide (2017-18):  95% of Teachers said our school supports Cultural Awareness and Inclusive Classroom Instruction  57% of Teachers said our school supports Innovation and Collective Responsibility  85% of Teachers said our school supports Peer Collaboration  77% of Teachers said our school supports Quality of Professional Development Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By October 2018, teachers will be represented on all teams to ensure teacher-driven innovation and collective responsibility. Grade teams will meet weekly using the District-wide data protocol to analyze student work and revise lessons to ensure student progress and all professional development sessions will have clearly communicated and targeted goals. The 2018-19 School Quality Guide will reflect a 5% percent increase the area of Innovation and Collective Responsibility. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Instruction: Teacher  Teachers/paraprofessionals/administrators will meet Paraprofessional September 2018 to June 2019 Administrators Teacher Leader Support staff at least once weekly in addition to the mandated periods to share instructional strategies around Common Core Standards.  Teachers will develop common rubrics as they pertain to grade-wide projects etc  Teachers will utilize Teachers College writing rubric across all grades  Teachers will collaborate with students to support student learning.  Teachers will develop/identify common assessments and determine a schedule for grade and school assessments.  Teachers will share newly acquired strategies including Thinking Routines via inter- and intra-classroom visits  Bridge to Middle School: Selected P.S. 219 teachers will  collaborate with receiving Middle Schools. Staff will agree to curriculum pacing guidelines developed by the group  Determine when and how student work will be gathered, analyzed, stored, and retrieved  Plan how to intervene for students who are unable to demonstrate proficiency  Teams will create coordinated assessments and intervention plans Professional Development: All Staff  Our overarching focus for professional development for the year in Danielson 1a, 1e and 4e, as well as the Instruction Focus of Productive Struggle  Work with district liaison to train staff on team building and collaboration Focus on selected Thinking Routines   Enriching early childhood classroom environment September 2017 to June 2018 Administrators Educational Consultants 3  Teachers of students of with disabilities will enhance their IEP writing skills  Teachers will examine how to implement and differentiate comprehensive literacy Journeys curriculum Improve the implementation of technology-based lessons and manipulatives in math instruction   Developing common tasks through intentional, focused Task Design (objectives, rubrics and activities)  Differentiating instruction for ELLs and SWDs in general education classes  Teachers will participate in team building activities observing meeting norms to ensure goals and objectives are met  Teachers participate in instructional rounds Students Collaboration: Students  Student achievement/outcome is at the heart of the framework.  Teachers will gather information on students through formative assessments including conferencing to ascertain how students learn, determine any gaps or misconceptions that might surface and formulate goals in collaboration with students. September 2017 to June 2018 Administrators Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Teachers and parents will work together during weekly Parent Tuesdays to gain a clear understanding of what students will be learning, why it is important and what the students will be doing to achieve their goals.  Monthly grade newsletters will be sent home to inform parents and families regarding curriculum matters.  The Parent Coordinator will provide monthly meetings and workshops for parents on a variety of topics around parent involvement in supporting their child's academic and socio-emotional achievement.  Offering parents opportunities at weekly Parent Engagement Tuesdays to discuss their child's academic progress, including assessment data, such as unit test scores, benchmarks, reading level data, periodic assessment data with teachers and the administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources Needed:  Anchor texts such as "Quality Questioning" and "Making Thinking Visible"   Library/media center resources Substitute/per diem teachers to facilitate professional development 4   Funding identified in myGalaxy to support professional development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, we will review the following systems to assess the progress toward meeting our goal:  Team meeting sign-in sheets, agendas and minutes  Data and instructional protocol products, such as data trackers, reflections and instructional inquiry protocol  Evidence of adjusting lesson plans to reflect inquiry findings Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instruments we will use to assess progress will be:  Team meeting sign-in sheets, agendas and minutes  Data and instructional protocol products, such as data trackers, reflections and instructional inquiry protocol  Evidence of adjusting lesson plans to reflect inquiry findings Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Quality Review (2017-18):  A score of Proficient was received for indicators 1.1, 1.4, 3.4, 1.3 and 4.2. A score of Developing was received for indicator 1.2, 2.2, 3.1, 4.1, 5.1.  3.4 High Expectations: School leaders consistently communicate high expectations regarding pedagogy, curricula, and professionalism through handbooks and individual letters to teachers. Parents are informed about the expectations connected to college and career readiness. School leaders provide workshops and training on expectations and hold teachers accountable for meeting them. Families understand the progress their children are making.  1. 1 Curriculum: School leaders and teachers ensure planned curricula are aligned to standards, address instructional shifts, and identify learning objectives through the use of “I can” statements. Teachers consistently plan activities to challenge students in all grades, including students with disabilities and ELLs, with rigorous tasks. Units of study and lessons are planned to be accessible for a variety of learners and coherently promote college and career readiness across all grades.  4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership Development: The majority of teachers engage in grade-level or school-wide inquiry-based teams. Teachers consistently analyze their students’ performance data to identify learning gaps. Teachers’ exploration of student performance data and teaching strategies strengthens their instructional capacity and typically results in progress toward school goals for groups of students. School Quality Guide (2017-18):  92%of families say that the principal encourages feedback from the community and them through regular meetings. (Q2b)  91% of families feel that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school. (Q3b)  92% of families say that the principal at their school promotes family and community involvement in the school. (Q3c)  83% of teachers say that the principal carefully tracks student academic progress. (Q11f) School Quality Snapshot (2016-17):  84% of teachers responded positively to questions about Collaborative Teachers  93% of teachers say that teachers at this school work together to design instructional programs  93% of teachers say that they have opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school 6  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Administration will norm and conduct observations quarterly, providing consistent feedback across the school community to increase MOTP in Domain 3 from Developing to Effective. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Research proves that student learning increase when teachers participate in Professional Learning Communities. (Vescio, Ross, Adams, 2008; p.87) Instruction: All Staff- teachers, para-professionals, etc. September 2017 to June 2018 Administrators Educational Consultants    School Leaders will work with constituents to establish a truly professional learning community School Leaders will develop Professional Learning Community/Inquiry Teams that will share practices, and engage in professional conversations Staff will agree to pacing guidelines developed by the group  Determine when, how student work will be gathered, analyzed, stored, retrieved  Plan how to intervene for students who are unable to demonstrate proficiency  Teams will create coordinated assessments and  intervention plans School Leaders will establish school-level instructional leads to build leadership capacity. Students Needs: Students Parents September 2017 to June 2018 Teachers Administrators  Leadership will ensure funds are allotted to purchase special programs for students with special needs.  Provide student choice  Encourage students to participate in Youth Summits, Special Education Day activities and Career Day activities to prepare them for college and careers  Provide Common Core curricula with adaptations for ELLS and students with disabilities. 8 Parents September 2017 to June 2018 Administrators Parent Coordinator Parent Engagement:  Parents will be invited to monthly culminating activities  Parents will receive training by Parent Coordinator of similar topics as staff  Parents and families will have opportunities to use the multi-media center visit with Support Team on selected Tuesday afternoons for assistance and direction pertaining to any services that may be needed.  The Schools’ Leadership Team will be actively engaged in the planning of events designed to promote students learning such as Health and Nutrition month emphasis etc. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be given an opportunity to practice and engage in the same structured questioning and discussion techniques the school will be focusing on in classrooms during monthly PTA meetings and/or parent coordinator workshops. The ultimate goal is to create a community of critical thinkers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The resources we will leverage to achieve this goal:  Vertically-aligned pacing and assessment calendars  Additonal standards-based formative assessments to monitor progress and inform instruction  Partnership with School Datacorps to track and analyze data to monitor progress and inform instruction  Anchor text, "Quality Questioning and Discussion" and six-related professional development sessions   The Brooklyn Borough Field Support Center's Algebra for All's Educational Consultant with Generation Full-time ULIT literacy coach Ready Supplemental ELA and Math programs, Newsela and Mathletics, to scaffold and differentiate instruction  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 9  Progress Monitoring:  By February 2019, school leaders will have completed half the needed teacher observations using Advance.  Unit and benchmark tests results will be analyzed in order to surface learning gaps and adjust instruction. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Administration uses Advance as an evaluative tool to monitor effective instruction.  Assessment data will be tracked in spreadsheets and shared with staff via Dropbox. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the School Quality Guide, 99% of families state that their school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. Additionally, 91% of parents state that school staff regularly communicates with them about how families can help their child learn. Teachers communicate often with parents through conferences, telephone call, progress reports, ClassDojo and IEP meetings about how they can help their children learn. Parents are invited to visit classrooms and observe the instructional programs. The Parent Coordinator conducts parent workshops throughout the school year. As per the School Quality Guide, 31% of parents completed the NYC School Survey. We have also seen a decline in parents attending the parent teacher conferences. Parental involvement is an important part of student success. These areas of challenge shows the need for more effective parental support for school-wide initiatives. We will increase outreach efforts to increase participation of parents by accommodating them through different meeting times. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, attendance at monthly parent meetings and workshops will increase 3%. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evaluation /feedback forms will be provided to parents Parents following meetings. Forms will seek to ascertain what they have learned, topics for additional workshops and areas of improvement.  Accurate attendance will be taken and registration forms will be generated so that email addresses and social media contact information may be captured.  Expanded use of School Messenger and Class Dojo to inform parents of upcoming events and activities September 2018 to June 2019 Administrators Parent Coordinator Technology Coordinator PTA Program/Professional Development: Parents  Workshops will be provided for parents  Some workshops will be offered during school hours to accommodate schedules, but the majority of workshops will be offered after school and will last approximately 1-1.5 hours. We will be Exploring topic such as: Supporting the ELL in the mainstream classroom Special Education: Is your special needs population meeting their annual yearly progress goals?   September 2018 to June 2019 Administrators Parent Coordinators, Educational Consultants, ENL Teacher, SBST Team, Guidance Counselor, IEP Teacher Teachers Administrators Staff Teachers Parent Coordinators Each Tuesday, during the 40 min sessions, staff will plan meeting with parents, to help them better assist their children with instruction; staff will prepare newsletters, communicate with parents via phone or email or have small group meetings. Parents Students Host specialized events that target specific groups of parents. Parents Students September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 2  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable.  University Settlement    Noel Pointer Foundation's Stringkidz Violin Program Studio in a School Imagine That Chess Program Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources:  Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator will be responsible for coordinating efforts.  Technology personnel to constantly update website and generate flyers  Additional Partners to provide workshops  Presenters for workshops Additional Resources:  Refreshment and workshop materials  Money to purchase incentives  Color copier and or machine to generate posters   Maintain web domain School Messenger Renewal Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will monitor through attendance at parent workshop. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance Logs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics F&P Levels   NYS ELA/Math Assessment Data  Pre/Post Assessments  Analysis of student work  Portfolios  NYSESLAT Scores  NYS Math Assessments  GO Math Unit Assessments  Entrance/Exit Tickets  Benchmark Assessments  Reteach/Enrich  Portfolio data  Mathleticsprogram  ClassDojo  Pre/Post Assessment Science  Grade 4 Science  Test Science End of Unit Test  Portfolio data   Journeys Shared/Guided Reading Strategy Groups SPIRE  Wilson Program  NewsELA    REWARDS  RTITier II Frontload  vocabulary  Accountable Talk  Go Math and Ready NY  Do Now  Problem of the Day  Mathleticsprogra m SOLVE/CUBES strategy SPIRE  RTI   Homework  Guided Mathematics Practice Front load vocabulary   Accountable Talk  Amplify Science  Front load vocabulary  Accountable Talk  Small Groups  Guided Reading  Conferring  One-on-One Conferencing Small Group   Guided Math Group  One on One Conference Small Group   One on One Conferencing When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.)  During School  After School  Mid-Winter/Spring Recess Programs  After schoolTutoring during the Spring & Winter Recess  During School  During School 4  Pre/Post Assessment  Social Studies End of Unit Test  Passport  Document based  Portfolio data  Pre/Post Assessment questions  Repeated reading  Accountable Talk One on One Conferencing Small Group During School Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) As per IEP Teacher Record Progress Monitoring Classroom Teacher Provided Restorative Justice Circles Small Group One-to-One During the day Afterschool STH Individual and Group counseling 5  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 15 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Counseling sessions will be offered with a resident guidance counselor. Services will include providing:  Materials  Uniforms  Bookbags  Subsidizing graduation expenses and field trips Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 6  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 7  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Currently all our teachers are Highly Qualified; however, all our teachers will be encouraged to stay abreast with current educational practices. Various methodologies are integrated into the curriculum. We will continue to align curriculum to the City, State and Common Core standards. Teachers will be encouraged to stay abreast of current educational practices. Various methodologies will be integrated into the curriculum. Materials and resources will be provided to support teaching and learning. Some strategies for recruiting highly qualified teachers include:  Work with union/human resources to recruit.  Use technology to extend the reach of Highly Qualified teachers  Schedule as interviews as possible when hiring new teachers 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We provide high quality professional learning opportunities aligned with the City and State standards. The school uses anchor texts such as Quality Questioning by by Jackie Acree Walsh and Beth Dankert Sattles and Making Thinking Visible by Ron Ritchhart, Mark Church, Karin Morrison and Number Talks by Sherry Parrish. This resource provides educators with practical knowledge and tools to create a positive and lifelong impact on student learning techniques and how to promote engagement, understanding and independence for all learners. Teachers meet in small groups using protocols to apply techniques learned. We will work closely with Achievement Coaches from District and Field Support Offices to collaborate with specific groups of teachers and review their techniques and provide feedback and inform best practices. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 8  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). At the end of the current school year, potentially interested parents/families are invited to an orientation by administration, classroom teachers, social and family workers to assist with the transition from Pre-K to Kindergarten. The Pre-K classes visit Kindergarten classrooms. Some students get the opportunity to meet their new teachers for the upcoming school year. At this time, parents/families are introduced to the new curriculum and provided with materials, such as “A Parent’s Guide to Kindergarten to acquaint them with expectations. The same is done for potential Pre-K students. Formation of Committee which consist of PK teachers, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Parent Coordinator.  Action Plan, with time lines, and activities  Workshops for Parent about transitioning to Kindergarten. Kindergarten teachers provide an overview of curriculum and expectation. Visit to Kindergarten Classrooms.  Dissemination of summer materials to introduce students and parents to Curriculum  Assessment of Students – Suggests intervention if necessary  PC as a bridge between Kindergarten  Meet the Teacher Our Pre-k to Grade 2 classrooms utilize a plethora of data to inform instruction and student development.  The Journeys ELA curriclum provides an initial baseline assessment of student’s literacy abilities and   continuous assessments on a regular basis. Student Portfolios with tasks, track progress and give teachers and parents a window into need for remediation and /or enrichment. Fountas and Pinnell reading levels are also assessed at the beginning-of-the year, middle-of-the-year, and end-of-the-year. Data is kept on the number of books students have read based on class/home reading logs.  Daily attendance provides insight into students/family who may benefit from additional support.  Common Core Performance Tasks provide opportunities to “Show what they know”and are reviewed by teachers to determine the next instructional step for the grade. In addition teachers also create their own formative assessment to address the needs of their class.  Reading and Writing Conference notes document students’ strength and challenges with particular skills and strategies. These notes often give insight to the students’ thought process. 9   The students also begin peer assessing their work utilizing simple rubrics. This helps to develop a critical eye by which to edit/evaluate their work. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. A MoSL team was assembled at the end of the 2017-2018 school year to begin the work of determining assessments to be used by the school. Teachers and administrators attended summer sessions geared to assist in the process. In September, the team met and continued to give study to the task at hand with input from the staff. The final decision arrived at was shared with the staff at a faculty conference. Inquiry team and grade meetings provide other forums for staff to determine the appropriate assessments to be used for students at various times 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5 - A, B, C, D, E 5 - A, B, C, D, E 5 - A, B, C, D, E N/A 5 - A, B, C, D, E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 367,537.00 196,989.00 12,366.00 0 3,081,024.00 X X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 0  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 1  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 219, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 219K - The Kennedy King School will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology.  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 2  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; 3   encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. P.S. 219 agrees to implement the following statutory requirements: The school will put into operation programs, activities and procedures for the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible students consistent with Section 1118-Parental Involvement of the Every Student Succeeds Act {ESSA}. The programs, activities and procedures will be planned and operated with meaningful consultation with parents of participating children. The school will involve the parents of children served in Title I Part A programs {s} in decisions about how the Title I Part A funds reserved for parental involvement is spent. In carrying out the Title I, part A parental involvement requirements, the school will provide full opportunities for the participation of parents with Limited English Proficiency {LEP}, parents with disabilities, and parents of migratory children. This will include providing information and school reports required under Section 1112 State Plans of the ESSA in an understandable and uniform format and, including alternative formats upon request, and, in a language parents understand. The school will carry out programs, activities and procedures in accordance with this definition of parental involvement: Parent involvement means the participation of parents in regular, two-way and meaningful communication involving student academic learning and other school activities, including ensuring-  That parents play an integral role in assisting their learning  That parents are full partners in their child’s education and are  included, as appropriate, in decision-making and on advisory committees to assist in the education of their child  The carrying out of other activities, such as those described in Section 1118-Parental Involvement of the ESSA. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; 4   Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.;  Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions;   Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;  Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Parental Involvement and School Quality  Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology.  Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; 5   providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. P.S. 219 agrees to implement the following statutory requirements: The school will put into operation programs, activities and procedures for the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible students consistent with Section 1118-Parental Involvement of the Every Student Succeeds Act {ESSA}. The programs, activities and procedures will be planned and operated with meaningful consultation with parents of participating children. The school will involve the parents of children served in Title I Part A programs {s} in decisions about how the Title I Part A funds reserved for parental involvement is spent. In carrying out the Title I, part A parental involvement requirements, the school will provide full opportunities for the participation of parents with Limited English Proficiency {LEP}, parents with disabilities, and parents of migratory children. This will include providing information and school reports required under Section 1112 State Plans of the ESSA in an understandable and uniform format and, including alternative formats upon request, and, in a language parents understand. The school will carry out programs, activities and procedures in accordance with this definition of parental involvement: Parent involvement means the participation of parents in regular, two-way and meaningful communication involving student academic learning and other school activities, including ensuring-  That parents play an integral role in assisting their learning  That parents are full partners in their child’s education and are  included, as appropriate, in decision-making and on advisory committees to assist in the education of their child  The carrying out of other activities, such as those described in Section 1118-Parental Involvement of the ESSA. School Compact for Learning September 2018-2019 School-Parent Compact (SPC) 1. This compact for learning is written with the spirit of cooperation among the entire school community-administrators, teachers, parents, students and concerned community members. All concerned understand that we must share responsibility for student learning and high achievement for effective, frequent communication between school and home, and for building capacity in the family-school community partnership through volunteering and training. This compact is based on our school vision, the Principles of Learning, the State’s student Common Core Learning Standards performance standards, and our school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan. 2. This compact serves as a written commitment among all members of the school community to share responsibility for student learning. 3. P.S 219 will: Provide high quality curriculum and instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment that enable the participating children to meet the State’s student academic achievement standards as follows: 6   Clear Expectations will be established.  Visible intermediate benchmarks of progress will be provided for each student and family via conferences, assessment results, Parent Information Folder and Parent Curriculum Conferences.  Books, materials, resources, and a state of the art school library that support high quality curriculum and  instruction will be utilized. Students will be encouraged to display Academic Rigor in a Thinking Curriculum by generating rubrics along with the teachers in all subject areas. This will allow them to effectively judge their work against the standards.  Teachers will be exposed to tried and proven methods of instruction and in turn, implement these  strategies/methods in the classroom in all subject areas. Students’ standard setting, current edited work will always be celebrated. These products will also be utilized as teaching tools and proof of students’ ability to “Achieve Excellence”. 4. P.S. 219 will hold parent teacher conferences at least four times the school year. September 2018   November 2018  March 2019  May 2019 During which, this compact will be discussed as it related to the individual child’s achievement. Additionally, the spirit and intent of the Compact will be articulated at P.T.A. meetings and at students’ special assemblies. 5. P.S. 219 will provide parents with reasonable access to staff. Specifically, staff will be available for consultation with parents as follows: Additional time will be dedicated to parent outreach as part of the Professional Development for teachers. Staff will be available to meet with parents during preparation before and after school by appointment only.   Parents and staff will communicate via the Parent  Information folder and set up a mutually convenient time for both parties to meet. The dates and times of the meetings will be relayed to the office staff who duly records the times of appointments Interpretation services will be made available.   Ensure that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to communicate with Limited English speaking parents effectively. 6. P.S. 219 will provide parent with frequent reports on their children’s progress. Specially, the school will provide reports to parents as follow:  Report Cards at the designated Parent/Teacher Conferences.  Additionally, results of school generated tests will be made available to parents.  The Periodic Assessment results in English Language Arts and Mathematics will be backpacked, or mailed to parents as they become available. 7. P.S. 219 will provide parents opportunities to volunteer and participate in children’s classes and observe classroom activities as follows:  Parents may participate in workshops and become Learning Leaders. These series of workshops equip parents to effectively assist in classrooms as observers and volunteers. Parents {other than volunteers} who visit the school to see their children in the classroom environment may consult with their child’s teacher regarding the 7  delivery of instruction and their child’s progress. Parents desirous of volunteering their services may contact a member of the PTA Executive for details. 8. P.S. 219 will provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system {e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report}. Responsibilities of Teacher. We as teachers will:  Treat each child with respect and value the uniqueness of each child and his/her family.  Provide an appropriate “print rich” environment that promotes learning.  Have clear expectations for students. They will know and understand the goals at each stage of learning. They will participate in setting these goals and evaluating progress.  Recognize student accomplishments and hold both public and private celebrations of their work.  Have fair and credible evaluations. See that the standards are clearly articulated to all students. Base assessments on progress toward them and be connected to curriculum and instruction.  Provide an environment where students are engaged in thinking about a solid foundation of knowledge-the linking of process and content.  Provide ample opportunity for accountable talk in order to allow students to develop ideas.  Call on students to use problem solving skills to promote reasoning in order that they may make sense of the world.  Have students engage in “authentic” activities that relate to the real world.  Promote a strong home/school partnership with active, regular contact with parent/guardians.  Invite parents into the classroom to volunteer for various activities (e.g., reading to students, sharing expertise in subject areas, celebrations of learning}.  Contact students’ families for positive reasons, keeping in touch about student progress. Responsibilities of Paraprofessionals  Support and encourage an environment where students are engaged in thinking about a solid foundation of knowledge.  Treat each child with respect and value the uniqueness of each child and his/her family.  Abide by all of the principles of this School Compact for Learning.  As a Non-Teaching member {Custodians, Kitchen Staff, school Aides, etc, Responsibilities are to:  Treat each child with respect and value the uniqueness of each child and his/her family.  Abide by all of the principles of this School Compact for Learning. Responsibilities of Parents We, as parents, will support our children’s learning in the following ways: Support my child’s learning by making education a priority in our home by Scheduling daily homework time.  Making sure my child is on time and prepared everyday for school  Monitoring attendance.  Talking with my child about his/her school activities every day.   Providing an environment conducive to study  Making sure that homework is completed.  Monitoring the amount of television my children watch.  Volunteering in my child’s school.  Participating as appropriate, in decisions relating to my children’s education.  Promoting positive use of my child’s extracurricular time. 8   Participating in school activities on a regular basis.  Staying informed about my child’s education and communicating with the school by promptly reading all notices from the school or the school region either received by my or by mail and responding, as appropriate.  Reading together with my child every day.  Providing my child with a library card  Communicating positive values and character traits, such as respect, hard work and responsibility.  Respecting the cultural differences of others.  Helping my child accept consequences for negative behavior.  Being aware of and following the rules and regulations of the school and district.   Express high expectations and offer praise and encouragement for achievement. Supporting the school’s discipline policy. Responsibilities for Students We, as students, will share the responsibility to improve our academic achievement and achieve the State’s high standards. Specifically, we will: Listen and follow directions.  Come to school ready to do our best and be the best.  Come to school with all the necessary tools of learning-pens, pencils, books, etc.   Participate in class discussions and activities.  Be honest and respect the rights of others. Follow the school’s class/rules of conduct.   Ask for help when we don’t understand.  Do our homework every day and ask for help when needed.   Read at least 30 minutes every day outside of school time.  Get adequate rest every night.  Use the library to get information and to find books that we enjoy reading  Give to our parents or to the adult who is responsible for our welfare the Parent Information Folder with all Study for tests and assignments. the notices and information we receive at school every day.  Work to resolve conflicts in positive non-violent ways.  Work hard to become a good citizen of my classroom as well as the school community. P.S 219 will: Provide high quality curriculum and instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment that enable the participating children to meet the State’s student academic achievement standards as follows: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum  Clear Expectations will be established.  Visible intermediate benchmarks of progress will be provided for each student and family via conferences, assessment results, Parent Information Folder and Parent Curriculum Conferences.  Books, materials, resources, and a state of the art school library that support high quality curriculum and  instruction will be utilized. Students will be encouraged to display Academic Rigor in a Thinking Curriculum by generating rubrics along with the teachers in all subject areas. This will allow them to effectively judge their work against the standards.  Teachers will be exposed to tried and proven methods of instruction and in turn, implement these strategies/methods in the classroom in all subject areas. 9   Students’ standard setting, current edited work will always be celebrated. These products will also be utilized as teaching tools and proof of students’ ability to “Achieve Excellence”. Responsibilities of Teacher. We as teachers will: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships  Treat each child with respect and value the uniqueness of each child and his/her family.  Provide an appropriate “print rich” environment that promotes learning.  Have clear expectations for students. They will know and understand the goals at each stage of learning. They will participate in setting these goals and evaluating progress.  Recognize student accomplishments and hold both public and private celebrations of their work.  Have fair and credible evaluations. See that the standards are clearly articulated to all students. Base assessments on progress toward them and be connected to curriculum and instruction.  Provide an environment where students are engaged in thinking about a solid foundation of knowledge-the linking of process and content.  Provide ample opportunity for accountable talk in order to allow students to develop ideas.  Call on students to use problem solving skills to promote reasoning in order that they may make sense of the world.  Have students engage in “authentic” activities that relate to the real world.  Promote a strong home/school partnership with active, regular contact with parent/guardians.  Invite parents into the classroom to volunteer for various activities (e.g., reading to students, sharing expertise in subject areas, celebrations of learning}.  Contact students’ families for positive reasons, keeping in touch about student progress Responsibilities of Paraprofessionals  Support and encourage an environment where students are engaged in thinking about a solid foundation of knowledge.  Treat each child with respect and value the uniqueness of each child and his/her family.  Abide by all of the principles of this School Compact for Learning.  As a Non-Teaching member {Custodians, Kitchen Staff, school Aides, etc, Responsibilities are to:  Treat each child with respect and value the uniqueness of each child and his/her family.  Abide by all of the principles of this School Compact for Learning. P.S. 219 will hold parent teacher conferences at least four times the school year. I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff September 2018   November 2018  March 2019  May 2019 During which, this compact will be discussed as it related to the individual child’s achievement. Additionally, the spirit and intent of the Compact will be articulated at P.T.A. meetings and at students’ special assemblies. 5. P.S. will provide parents with reasonable access to staff. Specifically, staff will be available for consultation with parents as follows: Additional time will be dedicated to parent outreach as part of the Professional Development for teachers. Staff will be available to meet with parents during preparation before and after school by appointment only.   Parents and staff will communicate via the Parent 0   Information folder and set up a mutually convenient time for both parties to meet. The dates and times of the meetings will be relayed to the office staff who duly records the times of appointments Interpretation services will be made available.   Ensure that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to communicate with Limited English speaking parents effectively. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents P.S. 219 will provide parents opportunities to volunteer and participate in children’s classes and observe classroom activities as follows:  Parents may participate in workshops and become Learning Leaders. These series of workshops equip parents to effectively assist in classrooms as observers and volunteers. Parents {other than volunteers} who visit the school to see their children in the classroom environment may consult with their child’s teacher regarding the delivery of instruction and their child’s progress. Parents desirous of volunteering their services may contact a member of the PTA Executive for details. 8. P.S. 219 will provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system {e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report}. Responsibilities of Teacher. We as teachers will:  Treat each child with respect and value the uniqueness of each child and his/her family.  Provide an appropriate “print rich” environment that promotes learning.  Have clear expectations for students. They will know and understand the goals at each stage of learning. They will participate in setting these goals and evaluating progress.  Recognize student accomplishments and hold both public and private celebrations of their work.  Have fair and credible evaluations. See that the standards are clearly articulated to all students. Base assessments on progress toward them and be connected to curriculum and instruction.  Provide an environment where students are engaged in thinking about a solid foundation of knowledge-the linking of process and content.  Provide ample opportunity for accountable talk in order to allow students to develop ideas.  Call on students to use problem solving skills to promote reasoning in order that they may make sense of the world.  Have students engage in “authentic” activities that relate to the real world.  Promote a strong home/school partnership with active, regular contact with parent/guardians.  Invite parents into the classroom to volunteer for various activities (e.g., reading to students, sharing expertise in subject areas, celebrations of learning}.  Contact students Responsibilities of Parents II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities We, as parents, will support our children’s learning in the following ways: Support my child’s learning by making education a priority in our home by  Making sure my child is on time and prepared everyday for school  Monitoring attendance.  Talking with my child about his/her school activities every day.   Providing an environment conducive to study Scheduling daily homework time. 1   Making sure that homework is completed.  Monitoring the amount of television my children watch.  Volunteering in my child’s school.  Participating as appropriate, in decisions relating to my children’s education.  Promoting positive use of my child’s extracurricular time.  Participating in school activities on a regular basis.  Staying informed about my child’s education and communicating with the school by promptly reading all notices from the school or the school region either received by my or by mail and responding, as appropriate.  Reading together with my child every day.  Providing my child with a library card  Communicating positive values and character traits, such as respect, hard work and responsibility.  Respecting the cultural differences of others.  Helping my child accept consequences for negative behavior.  Being aware of and following the rules and regulations of the school and district.   Express high expectations and offer praise and encouragement for achievement. Supporting the school’s discipline policy. III. Student Responsibilities Responsibilities for Students We, as students, will share the responsibility to improve our academic achievement and achieve the State’s high standards. Specifically, we will: Listen and follow directions.  Come to school ready to do our best and be the best.  Come to school with all the necessary tools of learning-pens, pencils, books, etc.   Participate in class discussions and activities.  Be honest and respect the rights of others. Follow the school’s class/rules of conduct.   Ask for help when we don’t understand.  Do our homework every day and ask for help when needed.   Read at least 30 minutes every day outside of school time.  Get adequate rest every night.  Use the library to get information and to find books that we enjoy reading  Give to our parents or to the adult who is responsible for our welfare the Parent Information Folder with all Study for tests and assignments. the notices and information we receive at school every day.  Work to resolve conflicts in positive non-violent ways.  Work hard to become a good citizen of my classroom as well as the school community. 2 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: P.S. 219 has identified 48 ELL students for the 2018-19 school year. According to NYSESLAT and NYSITELL tests, a majority of our ELLs are at the entering and emerging levels, and the vast majority scored levels 1 and 2 on the state ELA and math tests. This demonstrates ELLs are in need of targeted academic intervention services in order to move from entering and emerging beginner levels, to expanding and transitioning advanced levels, as well as move from levels 1 and 2 on the ELA and math tests to levels 2 and 3. Hence, we will be providing an Academic Intervention Supplemental After-School Program for ELLs, grades 3-5, on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30 to 4:30 pm beginning December 2018 through May 2019, totaling approximately 130 hours of supplemental instruction. Notifications and permission slips for the Title III After School Program will be sent home in the families' preferred languages. The primary teacher for the program is dually certified in ENL and bilingual (Spanish). The program's instructional focus will alternate with ELA/ENL and Math, followed by a focus on the NYSESLAT beginning in March. Instruction will be provided in English following our school's ENL program model. Journeys, Newsela, GoMath, Mathletics and IXL materials will be utilized for daily instruction, as well as as Anatasio and Associate's Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT, which will be used distinctively in the after school program. Technology will be integrated into instruction with the use of a SmartBoard and laptops. A balanced literacy approach will be used to increase students' proficiency in all four modalities of English acquisition: listening, speaking, reading, and writing. ELA/ENL lessons will be designed to enable ELLs to build vocabulary, infer from the text, draw conclusions, paraphrase, and develop other skills such as main idea, details, cause and effect, compare and contrast, and writing a response. Math lessons will focus on how to read and solve math problems, and how to thoroughly engage in outlining and explaining the steps used to arrive at the solution to the problems. The progress of the students will be continuously monitored through the use of informal and formal assessments. Students will have access to bilingual dictionaries, online translation websites, as well as the bilingual glossaries provided for state exams. All relating correspondence, such as program notifications, will be maintained on file. Student attendance will be taken and maintained on file. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider 4  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: The Title III Program teacher, as the sole ENL teacher and ELL Program Coordinator in the school, attends ELL Professional Learning Sessions through the Brooklyn Field Support Center and the Department of English Language Learners and Student Support at no cost to the Title III Program. Professional development sessions include such topics as RTI, differentiating instruction, and scaffolding for ELLs. The teacher is responsible for turn-keying information presented at grade team meetings and/or weekly PD sessions at no extra cost to Title III. These PDs will assist in ensuring ELLs are receiving robust ENL instruction in their classrooms during the day in their general classrooms, as well as their ENL stand-alone, push-in and pull-out program, which will in turn enhance the progress of students in the Title III After School Program. Professional Development: · · · Questioning" from November to June · Agendas and attendance sheets for all PD sessions will be maintained on file. Professional Development session on Journeys in November 6 Two Professional Development sessions on Mathletics&nbsp;in October and November 12 Professional&nbsp;Development sessions on the school's instructional focus, "Quality 6 Professional Development sessions on data driven instruction rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: Parents/guardians of ELLs can feel disadvantaged because of linguistic barriers, or they may be new to the country and are unfamiliar with our school system and/or are new to the area and our school. Families of ELLs often voice concern about their inability to help their children with their homework because of language barriers or because they don't understand the material. Therefore, we feel it is important to provide additional opportunities for families of ELLs to be more involved in the school community, as well as provide additional support, to assist in their understanding of the curricular demands for the school year. New parents/guardians of ELLs are invited to an orientation at the beginning of the year, and parents/guardians of continuing ELLs are invited to an orientation on Curriculum Night in September. At both events, the Title III After School Program is explained. Once the program has started, parents are informed regularly about programs on Parent Tuesdays, where in they can meet with the Title III ENL teacher about their child's progress. Additionally, Title III ELL parents are invited to meet with the Title III ENL teacher during Parent-Teacher conferences in November and March, as well as additional curriculum nights interspersed throughout the year. For the 2018-19 school year, parents/guardians of ELLs in the Title III After School Program will be invited to join their child for a special two-hour program session once a month. Invitations will be sent home in the student's home language, and families will be invited for an orientation during Parent-Teacher Conferences in November. During these sessions, parents will work with their child to review his/her progress in their daily classes, as well as the after school program. Parents will work with students on online programs that are available to complete at home as well, such as Journeys, GoMath, Ready NY and EngageNY. As state tests near, testing 5 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities content, study materials and study strategies will be reviewed. The Title III ENL teacher is bilingual certified and will be able to translate when needed for Spanish speaking parents/guardians. Google translate and NYC Dept. of Education's Language and Interpretation Unit will be utilized for translation and interpretation services when needed. Correspondence, agendas and attendance sheets for meetings will be maintained on file. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 18 School Name Kennedy King Elementary School Borough Brooklyn School Number 219 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Winsome Smith Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Coquille Houshour Teacher/Subject Area Sheila Vaughan Teacher/Subject Area Anthony Lucas Related-Service Provider Kayan Hall Austin Superintendent N/A Assistant Principal Wanda Singletary Coach N/A School Counselor Gladys Freeman Parent N/A Parent Coordinator Anthony Gordon Field Support Center Staff Member Soeurette Fougere Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 556 7 Total number of ELLs 40 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.19%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Formal and informal assessment tools are used to assess early literacy skills of our ELLs. Both the classroom teachers and our ENL teacher use Fountas and Pinnell Running Records data to track students' literacy levels throughout the school year. Classroom teachers use teacher-generated Journeys, Go Math and Ready NY assessments to monitor student's progress. Assessment data enables teachers of ELLs, as well as our ENL teacher, to identify ELL students' specific needs, adapt instruction and work collaboratively to ensure growth. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Fountas and Pinnell running records are collected from teachers at the beginning, middle and end-of-the-year and entered into an online spreadsheet and analyzed, and the ENL teacher can easily reference the data. Scores from Journeys, ReadyGen and Go Math unit assessments are collected from teachers and entered into an online spreadsheet and analyzed, and the ENL 8  teacher can easily reference this data. The ENL teacher collaborates with classroom teachers and the Inquiry Team to analyze the data for ELL subgroup(s). 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Success of the ELL program is evaluated by ELL performance on periodic informal assessments, such as Fountas and Pinnell running records levels, pre- and post-unit tests, and teacher-generated assessments; formal assessments, such as the MOSL performance periodic tests; NYSESLAT state exams; and ELA, Math and Science exams, and whether we have met our AYP targets for ELLs on such exams. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? All assessment data is online and available to the ELL teacher. The ENL teacher collaborates with classroom teachers and the Inquiry Team to analyze the data for ELL subgroup(s). 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Data is analyzed to identify ELL students' academic needs. Emphasis is placed on TIER 1 instruction to ensure rigorous, standards-based instruction. Classroom teachers and our ENL teacher receive targeted professional development on teaching ELLs and ELLs with disabilities. Informal and formal assessments are analyzed and inform instructional adjustments for ELLs, including TIER 2 instruction, which is provided in small groups by classroom teachers, and TIER 3 instruction, which is provided in smaller groups by out-of-classroom teachers. The school utilizes the data to identify student's language proficiency levels to identify the level of language support ELLs require. ELLs who are beginners receive the most support (360 minutes or more of ENL). ELLs who are intermediate also receive 360 minutes or more of support. Advanced students receive 180 minutes or more of ENL support. Proficiency levels determine how teachers modify their curriculum to meet student's needs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT testing data shows that the majority of ELLs reach higher levels of proficiency on the listening and speaking modalities first, followed by reading and writing. Prompted, text-based writing proves particularly challenging. Generally, students at entering and emerging NYSITELL levels are able to achieve transitioning and expanding levels on the NYSESLAT within two years, and test out of the NYSESLAT in an additional two years. NYSESLAT testing data and the ELL Data Analysis tool demonstrate that the majority of ELLs reach higher levels of proficiency on the listening and speaking modalities first, followed by reading and writing, which happens after students develop their listening and speaking skills. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers of ELLs are provided with NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores for their ELL students. Data from the ELL Data Analysis tool are shared with teachers of ELLs. The ENL teacher and teachers of ELLs discuss strategies for meeting yearly goals for ELLs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 9  Currently, we use the standalone ELA ENL program for entering-level ELLs, and pull-out ENL program for the rest of our ELLs. Students are pulled out in graded, homogeneous groups. Beginner / Entering level and Low Intermediate / Emerging ELLs receive 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. Intermediate / Transitioning and Advanced / Expanding level ELLS receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. Proficient / Commanding level ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our ENL teacher is dual certified in TESOL and Common Branches with a bilingual extension in Spanish, and therefore is able to teach a flexible standalone and integrated ENL program and provide all ELLs with the mandated number of instructional minutes, as per CR Part 154. Beginner / Entering level and Low Intermediate / Emerging ELLs receive 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. Intermediate / Transitioning and Advanced / Expanding level ELLS receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. Proficient / Commanding level ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is integrated into ENL and ELA instruction in accordance with CCLS with more of an emphasis on non-fiction reading material in order to develop ELL vocabulary. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? New admits whose home language is Spanish are administered the Spanish LAB, in addition to the NYSITELL. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is differentiated in every classroom for all students, including ELLs all subgroups, during TIER I instruction using modeling, charts, visuals and technology. TIER 2 instruction is utilized in small groups, and students are ability partnered. Teachers provide additional one-on-one instructional support with TIER 3 instruction. Instruction is differentiated for newcomer ELLs by providing phonemic supports, singing, chanting, the use of TPR, simple graphic organizers and more non-fiction shared reading with large or shared texts, and shared writing exercises. Developing ELLs are provided more complex graphic organizers and more shared reading support. ELLs participate in a Title III after school program to support language acquisition and development in reading, writing and math. SIFEs receive additional reinforcement and instruction in order to fill learning gaps. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs use numerous instructional strategies to help their students access academic content and accelerate English language development, such as scaffolding lessons to meet students where they are, differentiating lessons by providing visual and auditory aids, offering manipulates for hands-on engagement opportunities wherever possible, as well as pairing, small group instruction and one-on-one conferring. 0  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The classroom teachers and the ENL teacher collaborate on curricular, instructional planning to ensure we achieve ELL-SWDs' IEP goals and students attain English proficiency. ELL-SWD students are scheduled in Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classrooms whenever possible. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELL students determined to be at-risk receive intervention services, such as Academic Intervention Services (AIS) and At-Risk Resource Room instruction, and individual or small group instruction. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? One of our targets is to improve ELL attendance. We are considering more programs to get parents of ELLs more involved, such as workshops and classes, to help address attendance issues with parents. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs or services will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students at P.S. 219 have access to after school programs, and ENL students participate in after a Title III funded ELL after school program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Classrooms are print rich; have word walls; content area vocabulary charts; extensive, leveled, genre and topic based libraries; and have reference books and dictionaries in English and in native languages, where appropriate. Strategy, process and content charts created by teachers, with and for students, are used instructional aids. Digital audio and visual media are available in all classrooms, such as listening centers; SmartBoards; computers; and LEAP Frog electronic books. Students also have on-line resource subscriptions. Additionally, there are extensive assortments of math manipulatives for hands-on exploration in every classroom. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? ENL instruction is offered in English, with some native language support, when appropriate, or as needed. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Classroom teachers, service providers and our ENL teacher work together to ensure ELLs receive all required services instruction appropriate for their age and grade levels during grade-level planning sessions and shared preparation periods. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs, in grades 1-5, as well as many Pre-K and K students, register after the beginning of school, so we presently do not offer activities for newly enrolled ELLs before the start of the school year. We do offer orientations for newly enrolled Pre-K and K students in June, prior to the new school year. These orientations include an introduction to key school personnel; descriptions of programs offered; ELL identification and placement procedures; what to expect the first few days of school; how to prepare children for Pre-K and Kindergarten over the summer; how to cope with separation anxiety; a school 1  tour, including visits to classrooms across the grades; and a Q&A session with the Assistant Principal. Materials are translated and interpreters are available during these orientations. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We are an elementary school; language electives are not offered. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development is provided for all teachers by a CITE staff developer. The Principal and Assistant Principal facilitate professional development sessions for staff during grade and school-wide meetings. The school schedule is arranged so every grade has at least three common prep periods per week allowing for collaboratively planning. Additionally, the ENL teacher shares at least one common prep with each grade level to collaborate with ELL students' teachers. All faculty conferences are planned as opportunities for teachers to learn from one another. The focus of professional development this year is "How to provide cognitively rigorous instruction for all students?", which is one of the components of the framework for grade schools and an evaluative measure in the Learning Environment Survey. The ENL teacher attends professional development opportunities with the Brooklyn South Brooklyn Field Service Center. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Teachers attend out-of-building professional development trainings or workshops specific to ELLs offered by the Brooklyn South Brooklyn Field Service Center and outside agencies, and turnkey information and methodologies from these trainings or workshops to their colleagues during common planning periods or after school school-wide meetings. Additionally, teachers observe each other during in- and inter-school visitations. Materials from workshops are maintained in a binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to initial parent orientations, family night, and parent-teacher conferences, we schedule meetings with individual parents during our ongoing weekly Parent Tuesdays to discuss the goals of the program, their child's language development progress, their child's English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. In-house translators, parent volunteers, and the over-the-phone Translation and Interpretation Unit are used, as needed. 2  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents attend Family Night at the beginning of each school year. Workshops for parents are offered by outside organizations, teachers, the guidance counselor and the Parent Coordinator on topics such as helping their children homework, online learning, nutrition, parenting issues, and other topics of interest to parents. Parents are involved in the school in a variety of ways: they are on our PTA, School Leadership Team, volunteers for school social and cultural events, etc. Parents attend workshops on their child's curriculum and upcoming standardized tests. Through our Title III funding, parents attend instructional meetings on NYSESLAT and at-home English learning led by our ENL teachers. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Winsome Smith, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Kennedy King Elementary School DBN: 18K219 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Winsome Smith Title Principal Wanda Singletary Assistant Principal Anthony Gordon Parent Coordinator Coquille Houshour ENL/Bilingual Teacher N/A Parent Brenda Weekes Teacher/Subject Area Anthony Lucas Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Gladys Freeman School Counselor N/A Soeurette Fougere Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A N/A N/A N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/6/18 9/6/18 9/6/18 9/6/18 N/A 9/6/18 9/6/18 N/A N/A 9/6/18 9/6/18 9/6/18 N/A N/A N/A 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 18k219 School Name: Kennedy-King Elementary Superintendent: Beverly Wilkins The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Coquille Houshour Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Upon admission to the NYCDOE, each parent completes a parent/guardian Home Language Identification Survey identifying written and oral communication preferences, which are then entered into ATS and placed into students' cumulative folders. Additionally, language preferences are recorded on emergency student emergency cards, which are maintained in the main office, in teacher's classrooms, and with the nurse. Language preferences are shared with the school community by the Language Access Coordinator, and are available on student emergency cards and in cumulative folders. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 6  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral AFRIKAANS ARABIC BENGALI CHINESE HAITIAN CREOLE MANDARIN ENGLISH SPANISH 1 13 1 3 16 0 536 30 .17 2.17 .17 .5 2.67 0 89.33 5 1 13 1 2 17 1 532 33 .17 2.17 .17 .33 2.83 .17 88.67 5.5 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents Admissions Documents Parent Handbook Discipline Code Parent Teacher Conferences Parent Teacher Conferences September September September September November Parent Teacher Conferences March Letters/flyer to be backpacked home Throughout the year to parents. NYCDOE Translation Unit Provided by NYCDOE NYCDOE Translation Unit NYCDOE Translation Unit NYCDOE Translation Unit Provided by NYCDOE 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 7  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Family Night September Parent Teacher Conferences November, March, and May ELL Parent Orientation September Parent Tuesdays Tuesdays (on-going) interpretation service(s)? Staff can request an in-staff interpreter or use an over-the-phone interpreter. Staff can request an in-staff interpreter or use an over-the-phone interpreter. Staff can request an in-staff interpreter or use an over-the-phone interpreter. Teachers can request an in-staff interpreter or use an over-the-phone interpreter. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, our school uses the services of an on-staff or over-the-phone interpreter to contact the parents/families of limited English proficient parents. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the beginning of the year, the Language Access Coordinator surveys the staff to find out which staff members speak languages other than English. A memo is then given to all staff outlining teachers available for interpretation services, as well as how to use over-the-phone interpretation services and procedures for requesting translation services. Attached to the memo is Regulation of the Chancellor A-663, so all staff are aware of rights and responsibilities under the regulation. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents/guardians requiring language assistance services are provided a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities, which outlines their rights regarding translation and interpretation services in their preferred language. A sign with languages covered, as well as the availability of interpretation services, is prominently placed in 8  the primary entrance to our school. The Safety Plan contains procedures for ensuring language access services are provided for parents/guardians. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school has many mediums from which we gather feedback from parents regarding the quality and availability of services. We have weekly Parent Tuesdays, wherein parents/guardians are invited to meet with teachers, Family Night, and parent teacher conferences three times a year. Additionally, parent surveys are evaluated as a staff, and parent responses to the surveys inform our school's procedures. 9 
