 20K220 School Name: J.H.S. 220 JOHN J. PERSHING Principal: SHELDON DEMPSTER   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: John J. Pershing IS 220 332000010220 6-8 4812 9 th Ave Brooklyn NY 11220 718-633-8200 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 20K220 (718) 871-7466 Fax: Mr. Sheldon Dempster sdempster@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Mr. Sheldon Dempster Mr. Brian Isler N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 20 Ms. Karina Constantino Superintendent: 415 89th Street, Room 401, Brooklyn, NY 11209 Superintendent’s Office Address: kcostan@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 759-4908 Phone Number: Brooklyn FSC: 718-752-4842 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Mauricierede Govia Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89 th Street, Brooklyn NY 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4862 Phone Number: 718-759-4960 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ms. Courtney Parker Teacher  Name Mr. SheldonDempster Mr. Brian Isler Ms. Jessica Garcia Ms. Rosemarie Sullivan N/A N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ms. KimIhata Ms. Jasmine Wright Ms. Andrea Wright Ms. Madeline Humphreys Teacher Parent Parent Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview The mission of Pershing Middle School is to support students' academic, social and moral growth, to foster a lifelong commitment to learning and to encourage responsible contributions to society. We seek to create a partnership reflecting the high standards of supportive families, conscientious learners, committed staff and an involved community.   These goals should maximize potential for student success. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. John J.Pershing Middle School is an intermediate school with 1527 students from grade 6 through grade 8 located in Sunset Park, Brooklyn. This is a vibrant learning community that serves a diverse student body. The school serves five hundred and twenty nine English Language Learners in an inclusive setting. The school population comprises 1% Black, 41% Hispanic, 4% White, and 52% Asian students. The student body includes 34% English language learners and 15% special education students. The average attendance rate for the school year 2015-2016 was 96%. We continue to partner with local institutions of higher learning such as Hunter College, Fordham University, Teachers' College and Brooklyn College to nurture and cultivate student teachers. To better serve our students in social studies, this is our third year being accepted to the Center for The Arts - Runaway Slave Colonial Art project. Our 7th grade social studies and art teachers collaborate and teach an interdisciplinary colonial slave art unit. Students study runaway slave ads and create their own as a culmination. This year, we will be implementing the Passport curriculum in social studies. The social studies department has adopted the Passport Curriculum and began unpacking units of study. The department has also created pacing calendars for each grade. In addition, we will be offering the US History Regents in June 2019 to 8th grade students. Our Spring Arts Festival includes the 7 th and 8 th grade Architectural Fair, spring concert, multi cultural celebration and arts exhibit. In addition we continue our partnership with Broadway Juniors to allow our students the opportunity to participate in a school musical production. We also implemented CHAMPs for students to showcase their athletic abilities. During the 2016-2017 school year we implemented our first sports team. Our 7th and 8th grade boys played on the Pershing Basketball Team. We continued this program by joining a NYCDOE league and look forward to our third year. All teachers and all students in the building have a Pershing Gmail account. ELA/ENL and social studies teachers use Google Classroom which allows students to work collaboratively on group projects by sharing slides via the Google Drive. Teachers also use this feature to conference with students on their writing. ELA/ENL continue to use read non fiction articles on line using NEWS ELA PRO. Additional programs to address the needs of ENL students include Arts Connection and Lincoln Center Theatre Learning English and Drama Project (LEAD). We expanded the AVID program to 6th and 7th grade. In the upcoming school year, each grade will have an AVID class. These students visited Columbia University, LIU, and Hunter College. Students also attended the Principal's Conference to speak with principals considering the program in June of 2017. Students also facilitated an AVID Bake Sale for victims of the Hurricanes and donated all proceeds to Calallen High School in Corpus Christy, Texas. This AVID school is now able to replace all lost/damaged school supplies. Science, math, and computer science teachers have incorporated STEM lessons into the curriculum. Some STEM/STEAM iniatives that we have launched are, the Billions Oyster Project and Facelab. BOP IS AN ECOSYSTEM RESTORATION AND EDUCATION PROJECT aimed at restoring one billion live oysters to New York Harbor and engaging 0  hundreds of thousands of school children through restoration based STEM education programs. FaceLab focuses on evidence-based strategies for effective family engagement. It is relational, builds capacity of families and is linked to learning. addition, the math department is participating in Algebra for All which focuses on having all students complete algebra no later than 9th grade, enabling them to reach more advanced math courses in high school and better preparing them for college and careers. The school also received the SEP Grant that allowed the school to introduce the software engineering program. Finally we have a partnership with Urban Advantage designed to improve students’ understanding of scientific inquiry through collaborations between urban public school systems and science cultural institutions such as zoos, botanical gardens, museums, and science centers. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. ELLS and SWDs Both of these subgroups need strategic scaffolds to help them reach the rigorous standards necessary for college and career. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our administrative team had determined that the rigorous instruction is the area in which we our school has made the most growth in the past year, and we will continue to focus on developing our teachers’ capacity in this area. According to our most recent data, we as a school need to address the lack of progress and performance for our students with disabilities. Therefore, our key area of focus for this school year is supportive environment in the area of special education. More specifically, our focus is to raise academic rigor with a focus on students with disabilities. In addition, we will focus on engaging in true inquiry to remedy pedagogical deficiencies in teaching and learning. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K220 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1520 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 57 58 12 19 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 59 59 18 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 84.9% % Reduced Lunch 33.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.1% 41.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.08 1% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 42.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES NO YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 101 102 6 94.6% 0.7% 14.7% 1.3% 52.5% 0.1% 6 22% 5.9 55.7% 74% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YSH N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. * This section will be updated once the 17-18 data arrives. For the 16-17 school year: 2016 ELA 6% SWD proficient 4% ELLs proficient 2017 ELA 5% SWD proficient 4% ELLs proficient 2016 Math 11% SWD proficient 3  43% ELLs proficient 2017 Math 12% SWD proficient 42% ELLs proficient IS 220 has demonstrated significant growth and progress toward proficiency. However, we need to address the lack of progress and performance in our SWD subgroup. Based on the data, special education will be our priority and area of focus. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will design and implement Common Core Learning Standards aligned, project-based learning opportunities with scaffolds and supports for all students; including students with disabilities, English language learners, and advanced students as evidenced by teacher observations and Advance 1e and 3c. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will utilize common planning time to review and implement strategies to address the special needs of the students with disabilities and ELLs. Teachers will also focus on component 1E when developing lesson plans with their ENL and special education co teachers. The administrative team will conduct informal and formal observations with a focus on components 1E and 3C of Danielson's Framework. In addition, there will be learning walks, periodic data analysis, and weekly cabinet meetings. Teachers will receive targeted Professional Learning in order to provide them tools to implement scaffold and supports for SWD and ELLs. The school is also adopting the MSQI instructional program in ELA and ENL. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students with IEPS in ICT and Self contained classes and ELLs Teachers September 24, 2018-June 3, 2019 Administration and Coaches Administration September 24, 2018-June 3, 2019 Teachers September 24, 2018-June 3, 2019 Administration, Coaches, and teacher leaders How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be provided with scaffolds and strategies to support students at home during evening and daytime PA meetings led by the Parent Coordinator and the administrative team. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. All teachers Literacy Coach Math Coach 5  ENL Coach Data Specialist Parents Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Advance will indicate a 3% increase of teachers scoring effective or highly effective in 1e and 3c as compared to the previous school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teacher observations and Advance 1e and 3c Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the Special Education Reform there need to be interventions in place specifically a committee including but not limited to content area teachers, social workers, school psychologists, guidance counselors, deans, administrators, special education teachers, and papa professionals to develop a series of strategies and interventions so that students can become academically, socially, and emotional successful in their self contained and ICT placements. To date, there has been limited academic improvement shown by these students and a noticed emotional disengagement. We have PPT meetings and SIT meetings on all grade levels. In addition, we have parent meetings. The NYSED School Report Card and the NYC School Survey will be utilized as a data source. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in NYS scores demonstrated by students with disabilities in ICT and self contained settings. In addition, by June 2019, there will be a decrease in negative ILog incidents, Skedula Anecdotals, and OORS reports by students with disabilities in ICT and self contained settings. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). By November 2018, a special committee of constituents will be formed to develop strategies to address the special needs of the students with disabilities in ICT and Self contained settings. Students with IEPS in ICT and Self contained classes September 24, 2018-June 3, 2019 Teachers, School Psychologists, social workers, guidance counselors, deans, coaches, and administrators The administrative team will secure professional learning that is ongoing and provides information and support for staff. Teachers The special committee will share best practices and specific strategies with the entire staff. Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administration September 24, 2018-June 3, 2019 September 24, 2018-June 3, 2019 Administration, school assessment team, and coaches How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will offer workshops for parents that will assist students in their social, emotional, and developmental growth. Specific workshops will include, communication, self regulation, peer pressure, bullying, and Internet safety. Parents will be provided with these strategies during evening and daytime PA meetings led by the Parent Coordinator and the administrative team. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 8  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Para professionals Special education and general education teachers School Psychologist School Social Worker Guidance Counselors Deans Literacy Coach Math Coach ENL Coach Data Specialist Common Planning Time Per Session and Per Diem for professional learning Parent Coordinator Outside Professional Learning opportunities Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2019, there will be at least a 3% increase in ELA and math benchmark exam scores by SWD in ICT and self contained classes as compared to the September baseline exam. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NY Ready and DRP Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on data from the 2016-2017 Quality Review, student portfolios indicated a lack of coherence regarding measurements of classroom assessments. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will participate as part of a data inquiry team in order to analyze student work products, discern student strengths and weaknesses, research potential strategies and tailor instruction for all students; including students with disabilities, English language learners and advanced students measured by classroom performance on formative and summative assessments in all subjects. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? A content/grade specific calendar will be created for bi weekly inquiry meetings. Teachers Teachers will meet to revise content/grade specific rubrics. Teachers Teachers will bring student work and evaluate based on newly revised rubrics. Teachers Teachers will be able to identify trends in students work based on classroom assessments measured by this these rubrics. Teachers September 24, 2018-June 3, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, and Coaches September 24, 2018-June 3, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, and Coaches September 24, 2018-June 3, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, and Coaches September 24, 2018-June 3, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, and Coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will share rubrics with parents via Pupil Path. In addition, there will be evening and daytime PA meetings led by the Parent Coordinator and the administrative team to review classroom rubrics. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional Rounds Books Literacy Coach Math Coach ENL Coach Schedule adjustments 1  Peer Instructional Coaches Model Teachers Data Specialist Common Planning Time built into school day Per Session and Per Diem for professional learning Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students will be able to speak to their assessments using the rubrics and articulate the objectives of the assignments and how they met them. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student portfolio work Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. While teachers have begun to use data from baselines and benchmarks, they are not using enough on demand assessments. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will continue to build coherent instructional and social-emotional supports to improve student achievement for all students, including English language learners, students with disabilities and advanced students measured by at least a 3% increase in state exam ELA and math scores. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The administrative team will meet to discuss the progress of on demand assessments and next steps. Teachers Lesson plan templates will include a section for on demand assessments. Teachers A cycle of observations will be formed to monitor progress implementation of this strategy. Teachers Guidance counselors will visit classrooms to discuss grade specific workshops on organization, empathy, and substance abuse for students. Students September 24, 2018-June 3, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, and Coaches September 24, 2018-June 3, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, and Coaches September 24, 2018-June 3, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, and Coaches September 24, 2018-June 3, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, and Coaches Guidance counselors and the Parent Coordinator will organize and facilitate parent workshops (daytime and evening) on these topics. Parents September 24, 2018-June 3, 2019 Guidance counselors and Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be made aware of the use of on demand assessment through various forms of communication including daytime and evening PA meeting led by the Parent Coordinator and the administrative team. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PLF Administrative Team Literacy Coach Math Coach 4  ENL Coach Lesson Plan Template Adjustments Data Specialist Common Planning Time Per Session and Per Diem for professional learning Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, teacher observations will demonstrate a 2 %increase in the implementation of on demand assessment as evidenced in Advance observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student Performance on On Demand Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We continue to struggle with parent involvement in evening and day time activities as evidenced by low parent turn out at Parent Association workshops and parent teacher conferences. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parent involvement in Parent Association workshops and Parent Teacher Conferences will increase by 5% as evidenced by attendance records. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Create a calendar of Parent Association workshops highlighting instructional strategies. Parents Develop a calendar of ceremonies/celebrations highlighting student work and achievement. Parents Parents will be administered a survey to determine interests in planning for workshops and school activities through Pupil Path. Parents School messenger will be used to alert parents of school related activities. Parents September 24, 2018-June 3, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, and Parent Coordinator September 24, 2018-June 3, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, and Parent Coordinator September 24, 2018-June 3, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, and Parent Coordinator September 24, 2018-June 3, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, and Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. PA meetings will be planned monthly by the Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds will be needed for parent ceremonies. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 7  By February 2019, there will be a 2% increase in parent involvement in Parent Association workshops and Parent Teacher Conferences. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance Records Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Level 1 and 2s on NYS Assessments Level 1 and 2s on NYS Assessments Level 1 and 2s on NYS Assessments Level 1 and 2s on NYS Assessments PPT/parent referral Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Close Reading Strategies, annotating text, supporting claims with textual evidence CMP3, IXL, Khan Academy, I Ready Close reading and text based writing as well hands on experiments and virtual labs in the science content area Close reading and text based writing in the social studies content area Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small groups, one to one conferences, text based discussion, ENL push in model During, before, and after school Small groups and ENL Push in Model During, before, and after school Small groups and ENL Push in Model During, before, and after school Small groups, class debate and discussion, ENL push in Model During, before, and after school Small group and individual counseling Small group and individual counseling During the school day 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 177 students in Temporary Housing/Shelters. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. These students are managed by the Temp Housing Liaison, and provided with academic materials as needed. This includes, school supplies, books, and counseling services. All trips and school events are paid for and monthly check in's are done by the guidance counselors. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The school works closely with the HR point in identification of highly qualified teachers. We attend DOE hiring fairs, utilize DOE tools, and work with universities to gather resumes and interview our prospective teachers. Our HR department supports us in ensuring our hires have the proper credentials. We require prospective teachers to attend our new teacher orientation prior to the start of school. We support the retention of our teachers through continual professional learning strategies both in teams and through individualized support as needed. The principal and the assistant principal works one-to-one with each teacher to identify areas of support and next steps with the teachers and create professional learning opportunities as needed to demonstrate teacher growth and ensure that our teachers feel supported. We provide teachers with organizational supports such as calendars, and newsletters that keep them well informed. All teachers have access to supplies, computers, and state of the art technology (with trainings) so that their pedagogy is enhanced and supports all learners. We train teachers in behavioral strategies that support learners. We are committed to retaining our teachers and encourage them to participate in all areas of school life and we create team building events. We provide tenure information for our untenured teachers. As required, new teachers are matched with mentors. We utilize network supports, as well, to identify high quality professional learning opportunities and provide our teachers with current and research based models of pedagogy. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All staff receives professional learning (PL) that enables our students to meet Common Core State Standards. We employ the following strategies: -Ensuring that our curriculum is in place; specifically unit plans, maps, pacing calendars, and assessment so that all faculty 2  has the appropriate instructional focus -Providing focused PL in CCLS in-house and utilizing network CCLS workshops in ELA and Math -Engaging staff in PLs that focus supports for our subgroups -Deepening teachers’ understanding of using data to focus classroom instructional practice -Sharing the school instructional focus with all stakeholders through sustained and formal professional development sessions -Creating a structured and research based school Professional Learning Plan. -Working with our network to identify and create high level professional learning opportunities for all staff -Vertical and horizontal supervision of grades and content areas by school leaders -Conducting regular instructional rounds and the full implementation of Danielson’s Framework for Teaching which informs teacher needs and tracks progress -Implementation of weekly Instructional Cabinet where we continually monitor, assess, and revise our professional learning plans as needed. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 3  N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers on MOSL team have worked collaboratively to determine the selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures, professional development had been provided to the entire staff. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X N/A X N/A X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A and 5B N/A 5A and 5B N/A 5A and 5B Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1,240,413.00 0 57,716.00 0 8,079,604.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 4  identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. IS 220, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. IS 220 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 6  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 7  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) IS 220 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 8  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 9  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 0  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 1  ● always try my best to learn. 2  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The rationale behind this program is to provide English and Math intervention services to struggling ESL students through programs that are held before and after-school. All materials used will be supplemental and distinct from those used for daily instruction. We have analyzed the data results from 2018 NYS ELa and Math scores, the 2018 NYSESLAT scores and teacher anecdotal recommendations. The program aims to address the individual academic needs of students who have scored below a a 1.5 on the NYS ELA test and or are not showing growth in their NYSESLAT scores between 2017-2018. Morning Program There will be 2 classes of 20 students per class from grades 6-8. The program is from December to April for 20 weeks. The before school program is held four times per week, Tuesday- Friday, from 7:10 -7:55 am. There will be 2 ENL certified teachers teaching the morning program. The teachers are Elena Sahedeshagi (ENL), and Sylvia Brennan (ENL) This program uses I Ready to support instruction. I-Ready combines a valid and reliable growth measure and individualized instruction in a single online product Based on the results of the i-Ready® Diagnostic, students are automatically placed into instruction groups customized to their placement levels. These online lessons provide a consistent best-practice lesson structure and build conceptual understanding, in addition to being engaging and fun for learners of all levels . Students learn skills that support inter disciplinary learning such as finding key ideas and details in various genres, and analyzing craft structures in literature,Phonological Awareness, Phonics, High-Frequency Words, Vocabulary, Comprehension: Literature, Comprehension: Informational Text Focus on Math Literacies with I Ready provides comprehensive, standards-aligned math and language arts practice for K–12 and supplemental support on strengthen students skills in Number and Operations, Algebra and Algebraic Thinking, Measurement and Data, and Geometry. This engaging, online program is the core of our math initiative for our Title III program. . The program is supplemented with NY Ready math books and the online program Kahn Academy to meet students differentiated learning needs. In all sessions students are engaged in reading, thinking, analyzing, synthesizing, questioning, citing evidence, debating, and writing. Students of all levels of English proficiency will be able 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information to participate and learn to research and convey information by using a variety of resources which will supplement the above curricula. Home language support will be provided through the use of multiple resources including, but not limited to native language libraries, I-Pads and google translate, native language dictionaries,peer to peer and teacher to student support. Records and related documents including, but not limited to, attendance, parent notifications, meeting agendas and professional development material will be maintained primarily in a google document shared with all program participants (teachers, supervisors) In addition, any hard copy document requiring a signature or not uploaded to the electronic folder will be filed in a Title III binder stored in the ENL office in Rm. 260. Morning Program Schedule: The program is from December to May for 20 weeks. The before school program is held four times per week, Tuesday- Friday, from 7:10 -7:55 am. Two classes are held before school. Participating teachers, morning sessions (3 teachers) Elena Sayedeshagi, Madeline Humphreys and Christina Pennisi Participating students, morning sessions: All immigrant and ENL students in 6th, 7th and 8th grade are invited to attend. Morning Program Session Descriptions: Program 1: Building Literacy Skills with I-Ready The before-school programming will be facilitated by 3 teachers. This program uses the I-Ready on -line, individualized and differentiated instructional support product. Students learn skills that support inter disciplinary learning such as finding key ideas and details in various genres, and analyzing craft structures in literature. Program 2: Focus on Math Literacies with I-Ready I Ready provides comprehensive, standards-aligned math and language arts practice for K–12. This engaging, online program is the core of our math programming. The program is supplemented with the online program Kahn Academy to meet students differentiated learning needs. In all sessions students are engaged in reading, thinking, analyzing, synthesizing, questioning, citing evidence, debating, and writing. Students of all levels of English proficiency including, but not limited to English Language Learners will be able to participate and learn to research and convey information by using a variety of resources which will supplement the above curricula. After School Program There will be 5 classes of approximately 15 students per class from grades 6-8. The after- school program will be offered three times per week on Wednesday, Thursday and Friday from 2:25 - 3:55 pm. Programs will commence mid October of 2018 and will continue through the first week in May of 2019. This time frame covers approximately 25 weeks of instruction (excluding Christmas and Winter Break weeks). There will be 5 teachers, 3 content area teachers and 2 ENL teachers rotating and supporting each group for 30 minutes. At times a group 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information will have the support of two teachers; a content specialist and an ENL teacher. All ELL students will be served by an ENL teacher during this program. The teachers in the after school session are: Louis Reyes (Sp. Ed/Math), Christina Ruggiero (ENL), Yong Jun Chen (Math), Michelle Mannino (ELA), Courtney Parker (Reading/ELA)), Maria Sica (ELA), KaiLin Zheng (Math) Michelle Romano (ENL), Steve Zhao (Math)Laura Shimkus (ENL), Sylvia Brennan (ENL) Program I: Building Literacy Skills with I- Ready: This program uses I Ready to support instruction. I-Ready combines a valid and reliable growth measure and individualized instruction in a single online product Based on the results of the i-Ready® Diagnostic, students are automatically placed into student instruction customized to their placement levels. These online lessons provide a consistent best-practice lesson structure and build conceptual understanding, in addition to being engaging and fun for learners of all levels . Students learn skills that support inter disciplinary learning such as finding key ideas and details in various genres, and analyzing craft structures in literature,Phonological Awareness, Phonics, High-Frequency Words, Vocabulary, Comprehension: Literature, Comprehension: Informational Text Program II: Using Literature Circles to support reading and writing and develop a love for reading: This class will be comprised of expanding and Commanding Ells who will be engaged in A Literature Circle group to Support Reading and Writing and Develop a Love for Reading: In this program a licensed ENL teacher will guide participating students in a literature circle/ book club using a mutually agreed upon novel (TBD) Students will read, discuss and create written responses to this novel. The teacher will instruct students in CCLS aligned skills such as analyzing craft techniques, providing textual evidence to support assertions, and creating an argumentative essay. Program III: Targeted Math Support Focus on Math Literacies with I Ready, will provide comprehensive, standards-aligned math and language arts practice for K–12. This engaging, online program is the core of our math programming. The program is supplemented with another online program, Kahn Academy to meet students differentiated learning needs. In all sessions students are engaged in reading, thinking, analyzing, synthesizing, questioning, citing evidence, debating, and writing. Students of all levels of English proficiency will be able to participate and learn to research and convey information by using a variety of resources which will supplement the above curricula. Afternoon Program Schedule: The after- school program will be offered three times per week on Wednesday, Thursday and Friday from 2:25 - 3:55 pm. Programs will commence mid October through early May 2019. This time frame covers approximately 25 weeks of instruction (excluding Christmas and Winter Break weeks). 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Afternoon, Number of Participating Students: 90 students, from grades six, seven and eight. Afternoon Session Descriptions: In all sessions students are engaged in reading, thinking, analyzing, synthesizing, questioning, citing evidence, debating, and writing. Students of all levels of English proficiency will be able to participate and learn to research and convey information by using a variety of resources which will supplement the above curricula. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our professional development plan: Teacher leaders, administrators and outside providers will facilitate professional development series throughout the school year. We want to ensure that there is a balance between teacher facilitated PD's; where teachers share best practices a for us, by us approach, and outside professional learning experiences. We are also partnering with Hunter College in a PD/ student intervention initiative. This initiative will include professional development sessions with our teachers and Hunter college professors. Whenever possible and if relevant, our teachers will attend PD sessions offered by the district, city, state and higher learning institutions. Tier 1 Using Technology to Enhance Instruction: We are also seeking to enhance our instruction by integrating technology into the curricula. Title III teachers will receive training on how to maximize the technology we possess for optimal use in the classroom to improve the educational experiences of our students. This professional development will be led by our Teacher Leadership Team and model teachers: Christina Pennisi, Michelle Romano, Nadine, Laura Shimkus and Noreen Gillespie (NYS, ENL/ELA/Science certified). These teachers are skilled at engaging their colleagues in best practices in using technology in the classroom. These PD's will take place once per month during our weekly PL sessions from 2:25 - 3:35 pm. Tier 2 Professional Text Study Group Beyond Co-Teaching Basics: A data driven, No fail Model for Continuous Improvement Authors: Wendy W. Murawski and Wendy W. Lochner 7  Part C: Professional Development We are seeking to enhance our instruction by engaging in a collaborative understanding of important texts. In order to achieve the best possible outcomes for our students we seek to improve our Co Teaching methods by reading, discussing. exploring and analyzing researched based texts. Teachers will engage in bi-monthly professional learning conversations for approximately 2 hours. During this time, teachers will gain knowledge on how co-teaching teams can best plan for instruction including discussions of methods of co-teaching. Records and related documents including, but not limited to, attendance,meeting agendas and professional development material will be maintained primarily in a google document shared with all program participants (teachers, supervisors) In addition, any hard copy document requiring a signature or not uploaded to the electronic folder will be filed in a Title III binder stored in the ENL office in Rm. 260. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: We are committed to strengthening our relationship with parents as well as the Sunset Park community. We understand that an informed community is an integral part of a successful school. Students need all of the support they can get and ensuring that parents are well versed in meaningful and relevant content is a key factor in closing the achievement gap. As such we have planned parent workshops for the 2018-19 academic year. The workshops are scheduled to take place several times throughout the year and will be bundled into the Parent outreach already occurring in the school. The workshops include, but are not limited to the following topics: Using Skedula and the Parent Portal : September 2018 Assertive Discipline Practice for Parents: November 15, 2018 Internet Safety: December 7, 2018 Job Hunting Workshop: January 18,2019 Helping Your Child succeed in School/Improving study skills: February 8, 2019 Maximizing your time during Parent Teacher Conferences: March 1, 2019 Basic Technology Skills: May 22, 2018 Summer Learning Plan: June 14, 2019 Parents will be notified via translated letters, through phone calls using School Messenger, and Skedula announcements. We will also promote events on our school portal and calendar. All agendas and parent invitations will be sent out in the parents preferred language. Records will be maintained in an online google folder and in a hard copy folder kept in the ENL office in room 260. 8  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities In addition to the scheduled workshops, parents will be invited to learn, practice and perfect their English Language skills by becoming members of our winter and spring series "Project English" . The intended courses will take place after school and on selected Saturdays. We will offer two cohorts, one after school and one on Saturday in order to better accommodate parents' busy schedules. The after school program will run from Wednesday November 14, 2018 through April 24, 2018 from 2:30-4:30 for a total of 20 weeks and 40 hours, excluding school holidays. The Saturday program will run from Saturday December 1, 2018 through March 23, 2018 from 9-12 pm for a total of 14 sessions and 42 hours, excluding school holiday. Records and attendance will be maintained in an online google folder. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 9  0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 20 School Name John J. Pershing, I.S. 220 Borough Brooklyn School Number 220 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Sheldon Dempster Coach Sylvia Brennan ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Kim Ihata Teacher/Subject Area Michelle Romano/ELA/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Xuan/Math Related-Service Provider S. Hirsh/Speech Superintendent Karina Costantino Assistant Principal Raquel Diaz Coach Noreen Ambrosi School Counselor Heather Blasi Parent Jessica Garcia Parent Coordinator Shana Musler Field Support Center Staff Member Lucia Perez-Medina Other (Name and Title) E. Rielly/School Psychologist C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 4 2 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 12 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 2 D. Student Demographics 1  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1527 Total number of ELLs 529 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 34.64% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): CH If yes, indicate language(s): SP Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 1 1 2 7 1 1 2 8 1 0 1 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 3 0 0 2 0 0 5 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Instruction at our school is driven by analysis of multiple data sources. IS 220 uses a battery of assessments including formative, summative, departmental diagnostic tests, and teacher observations to assess the literacy skills of all ELLs. Specifically, as a member of the Middle School Quality Initiative, a DRP reading screener will be administered 3x per year to all students, a secondary I-Ready diagnostic will be administered to students most at risk . The results of these assessment is primarily used to inform instructional decisions for our more advanced students and our general education population. All ELL's will be administered an Ell Predictive assessment given in the fall and again in the spring. Both assessment measure Listening, Reading, and Writing. The results of this assessment are analyzed and used to inform curriculum modifications and adjustments. Students' speaking progress is assessed on an ongoing basis in the classroom through teacher observations and 2  group work. The information gathered from EDAT is shared, analyzed and used by teachers to target specific areas in need of improvement. Teachers pay close attention to at-risk levels of individual students and work together with their colleagues to address concerns. These results help us identify the students’ individual areas of need to assist in planning differentiated instruction and adapting our curriculum. Teachers enter quantitative, qualitative data and other anecdotal into Skedula. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teacher teams meet weekly during extended time, common prep periods and schedule embedded common planning periods. The teams are composed of ENL, co-teachers, content specialists and special education teachers. Department meetings are held at various times throughout the month to ensure that relevant information is shared with all stakeholders. During these teacher and department meetings, teachers and administrators analyze data from diagnostic assessments and make appropriate adjustments to our curriculum. Administration meets with the teacher leadership team every Friday during period 6 to discuss our ongoing professional development plan. This plan was created based on a needs assessment survey completed by all staff members. Also, teachers attend professional development workshops offered by OELLS, UFT, and professional learning institutions including but not limited to Fordham University, NYU, Hunter College and Purposeful Learning throughout the year to help inform their practice and stay relevant in their field. Teachers facilitate turn key sessions via lunch and learns and /or extended day meetings to ensure that we as a school community are sharing best practices and making adjustments as needed. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? IS 220 uses a battery of assessments including formative, summative, departmental diagnostic tests, reading screening DRP's and teacher observations to identify baseline, progress and areas of need. Specifically, DRP's and I-Ready baselines are administered to students. The results of this assessment is primarily used to inform instructional decisions for our more advanced students and our general education population. All ELL's are administered an Ell Predictive assessment given in the fall and again in the spring. The fall assessment measures Listening, Reading and Writing. The results of fall assessment have been analyzed and used to inform curriculum modifications and adjustments. A writing assessment will be administered in the winter of 2018 to all Ells. Students' speaking progress is measured on an ongoing basis in the classroom through teacher observations and group work. A HLA baseline is administered in our Dual Language Program and the Chinese screening test is administered to our newly arrived Chinese students entering our TBE program. The information gathered from EDAT has been shared, analyzed and is used by teachers to target specific areas in need of improvement. Teachers pay close attention to at-risk levels of individual students and work together with their colleagues to address concerns. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? According to the data from the school report card, the results from the standardized tests, the environmental survey, EDAT, and the Progress Report we recognize the areas in need of improvement. We have put into place various student programs, have establish a schedule of inter-visitations to share best practices through model lessons from model teachers and meetings 3  with Peer Collaborative teachers and Coaches,, have organized Professional Learning Communities to look at student work and devise interventions that address individual student needs. We have also introduced school- wide monthly formative assessment practice in all content areas and have programmed teacher led peer tutoring, and small group intervention periods (AIS) as professional activities on teachers programs. We have implemented an early morning, and extended day program to assist both struggling students and high performing students. We survey teachers for a more comprehensive approach to our programs and continue to analyze the data and tailor instruction accordingly 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] All Ells in need of academic intervention support are offered morning and after school intervention services. Some students receive "during the day" academic intervention. Academic support services for these students are individualized depending on the students' specific needs. For example, some may require counseling and group socialization skills while others require remedial academic skills. Teachers with AIS on their program and At-risk students are scheduled to meet during pre-determined periods. These intervention periods take place during a push-in, pull-out, lunch or a small group setting in order to maximize impact. Teachers work with students on specific skills using researched based strategies and provide ongoing assessment and feedback to ensure optimal outcomes. In addition, At-risk students are invited and highly encouraged to attend AM/Pm intervention programs to address their individual social-emotional and academic needs. Students and families are given the option of attending a program that is offered during a convenient time. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns across proficiency levels on the EDAT based on spring of 2017 NYSESLAT shows that 12.2 % or 65 test takers scored at the commanding level. In addition, six (6) students scored expanding on the NYSESLAT and also scored 3 or 4 on the ELA and are now commanding. 182 students advanced 1 proficiency level and 23 advanced 2 proficiency levels. These findings indicate that out of the 532 students who tested, 299 of them showed significant improvement. Our students have been programmed based on these data outcomes. With the exception of our Welcome/Newcomer class, our students are heterogeneously grouped in our ENL, Bilingual and Dual Language classes. According to various researched based philosophies. including that of Ester de Jong, "Language proficiency grouping... isolates students at the same level by not exposing them to more proficient students." Additionally, Nancy L. Commins says that ELL's benefit in heterogeneous groups when they can experience "authentic" communication with fluent English speaking models and are exposed to rigorous curriculum. One of our challenges is to target and provide additional support to the group of students who showed no progress. Our focus in providing interventions is to identify the areas of need and cultivate programs that address these specific groups. Presently, our AIS AM/ PM and Title III programs target our bottom third (2.3 and below on ELA/ Math state tests, students who received a 70 or below on the first quarter marking period and Developing Ells (4-6 YOS). 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Professional development and sharing sessions are offered to all content departments in an effort to ensure that all constituents have a clear understanding of the makeup of our ELL population and their specific needs. Data reports are 4  shared and analyzed on a continuous basis. Discussions and curriculum planning occurs during common planning time and Friday's after school. Department,grade and team meetings are held on Monday and Tuesday afternoons. Common preps and lunch and learns also provide an opportunity to share information and data. Google drive and Outlook 365 are used by teachers and administrators to disseminate and share findings, adjust instruction and collaborate on best practices. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. According to the guidelines provided by CR Part 154, our Freestanding ENL classes are grade specific heterogeneously placed blocks, who travel together as a group. We plan on opening a Newcomer class in each of our grades and are opening up a new Dual Language class in the 6th and 7th grades. Entering and emerging: In order for students to develop English Language skills so that they can succeed in core content courses, all entering and emerging ENL students receive 180 Stand alone minutes of ENL instruction by a certified ENL teacher. In addition theses students also receive a minimum of 180 integrated ELA/ENL instruction by a co teaching team or a dually licensed professional. Transitioning and Expanding: Students who test on the Transitioning and Expanding level receive a minimum of 180 integrated ELA/ENL instruction delivered by a co teaching team consisting of a certified ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher or a dually certified (ENL/ELA) professional. Commanding: Students who have tested commanding on the NYSESLAT and students who have scored expanding and have also scored a 3.0 or higher on the NYSELA exam in the last two years receive 90 minutes of ENL support in a content area class. b. TBE program. If applicable. According to the guidelines provided by CR Part 154, our TBE classes are grade specific heterogeneous blocks, that travel together as a group. Entering and emerging: In order for students to develop English Language skills so that they can succeed in core content courses, all entering and emerging ENL students receive 180 Stand alone minutes of ENL instruction by a certified ENL teacher. In addition theses students also receive a minimum of 180 integrated ELA/ENL instruction by a co teaching team or a dually licensed professional. 5  Transitioning and Expanding: Students who test on the Transitioning and Expanding level receive a minimum of 180 integrated ELA/ENL instruction delivered by a co teaching team consisting of a certified ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher or a dually certified (ENL/ELA) professional. In addition, all students in our TBE program receive 180 minutes of Home Language Arts in Chinese. c. DL program. If applicable. According to the guidelines provided by CR Part 154, our one way DL immersion program consists of one 6th grade class and one 7th grade class that is a heterogeneous block that travels together as a group. Our DL Spanish program serves both ELL students in need of English language development and monolingual English proficient students. Students receive instruction in a 50/50 model where half of their instruction is in English and half in Spanish; the target language. The DL program includes an ENL component designed to develop skills in the four modalities in English. Ell students receive discrete ENL instruction and English proficient students receive comparable language instruction to develop all four modalities; Reading Writing, speaking and Listening. Science and Social Studies are taught in the HL and English. In addition, a HL Arts component designed to develop skills in the four modalities in the students HL while cultivating an appreciation of their History and Culture is scheduled 5 x's per week or 225 minutes. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As mandated by the CR 154.2, our Entering and Emerging ELL students receive 180 ENL instructional minutes and 180 integrated ELA/ENL instructional minutes per week, our Transitioning and Expanding ELL students receive 180 integrated ELA/ENL instructional minutes per week and our Commanding students receive 90 integrated ELA/ENL instructional minutes per week. We deliver the mandated minutes via a Push In model. In addition to the mandated ELA/ENL minutes, the students enrolled in our Chinese TBE program also receive 180 instructional HLA minutes per week. Entering and emerging: In order for students to develop English Language skills so that they can succeed in core content courses, all entering and emerging ENL students receive 180 Stand alone minutes of ENL instruction by a certified ENL teacher. In addition theses students also receive a minimum of 180 integrated ELA/ENL instruction by a co teaching team or a dually licensed professional. Transitioning and Expanding: Students who test on the Transitioning and Expanding level receive a minimum of 180 integrated ELA/ENL instruction delivered by a co teaching team consisting of a certified ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher or a dually certified (ENL/ELA) professional. Commanding: Students who have tested commanding on the NYSESLAT and students who have scored expanding and have also scored a 3.0 or higher on the NYSELA exam in the last two years receive 90 minutes of ENL support in a content area class. 6  The DL program includes an ENL component designed to develop skills in the four modalities in English. Ell students receive discrete ENL instruction and English proficient students receive comparable language instruction to develop all four modalities; Reading Writing, speaking and Listening. Science and Social Studies is are taught in the HL and English. In addition, a HL Arts component designed to develop skills in the four modalities in the students HL while cultivating an appreciation of their History and Culture is scheduled 5 x's per week or 225 minutes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core Content is delivered in all program models from highly qualified, content-area specialists. The curriculum is aligned to grade levels and the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). The ENL and ELA Departments are fully aligned. The ENL department uses a scaffolds adaption of the ELA Reading and Writing Program. Expeditionary Learning is the framework used for the curriculum which has been adapted by teachers and administrators at the school. It is rigorous and uses CCLS, the Next Generation Standards and Advanced Literacy Practices as a foundation and a guide . This curriculum is used in our Bilingual classes, our ENL emerging, transitioning and expanding classes. All Certified ENL staff who are working with our students and using these programs adapt and modify all units of study to meet the needs of the varying levels of English language proficiency. This year, it is our goal to further adapt our current ELA/ENL curriculum to meet the needs of our Welcome and Entering students. The language of instruction of our Freestanding ENL programs is English with Home Language supports provided depending on the students language proficiency. In our TBE program, as students develop English Language skills, time in the Home language decreases. In order to foster "linguistic interdependence" students are supported in their transferring literacy skills from a students home language to a students new language. In our Dual Language Program. students receive instruction in English 50% of the time and in the target language. Spanish 50% of the time. We follow an alternating week model. Our instructional philosophy in all content areas and in all programs is to support ELLs in acquiring grade-level core content knowledge and language proficiency. Routines include Introducing Standards, Developing Background Knowledge, Supporting Vocabulary Development, Building Code-related Skills, Enhancing Comprehension, and Strengthening Written Expression while acknowledging the changing world we live in and the cultural background ouf our students. Scaffolds are integrated throughout the routines to support ELLs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language, standards based instruction is provided in the native language and in English for the duration of students' education in Transitional Bilingual Education. Literacy instruction is consistent with the program model design. All classrooms have genre-based libraries in English and support material in the native language; including but not limited to fiction and non-fiction texts, bilingual glossaries and dictionaries. Students have easy access to reading material in English and in the native language and teachers are supported and encouraged to develop native language proficiency as well as academic English skills. ELLs are also provided with bilingual glossaries and dictionaries for state exams. All students have access to laptops and on-line native language resources in all content area classes. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 7  SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Teachers at IS 220 differentiate instruction for ELL subgroups by implementing numerous strategies including but not limited to; building prior knowledge, integrating opportunities to use oral and written language for learning purposes, scaffolding to provide multiple entry points, collaborative grouping through partnerships and group activities, writing and literature response groups, informal assessments, writing reports, and sharing projects to promote English language, literacy and content knowledge development. Teachers maintain high expectations for all ELLs by providing standards based instruction while tailoring instruction to meet individual student needs. They use multiple modes of assessing learning including careful observations of students while students complete performance-based tasks, portfolio entries, learner self assessments and testing accommodations for formal standardized tests. They provide students with access to common core curriculum, facilitate English language development and afford students opportunities for social integration into their multicultural classrooms by offering comprehensible input for language acquisition. Teachers of ELLs make their context-embedded instructional talk more understandable by speaking clearly, repeating key points, defining essential vocabulary in context, and pairing talk with non verbal communication cues such as pictures, audiovisual clips, graphs, objects and gestures. In addition, teachers are aware and specifically develop appropriate language, content and social/affective objectives including a low-anxiety environment to promote language acquisition and content knowledge. In addition to these methods of differentiation, we employ a number of other techniques to provide multiple entry points for all ELLs. a. As part of our instructional plan for SIFE students we apply for the SIFE grant every year. Funds from this grant are then allocated towards our extracurricular SIFE program. Our SIFE students also participate in extended day, as well as small group instruction during the school day based on need. b. Our plan for newcomer ELLs includes access to extracurricular programs (funded by Title III funds) and self-contained ESL instruction (except in the case of ELLs with special needs and those in advanced programs). We’ve created a rigorous curriculum for newcomer ELLs in self-contained ESL classes based off of the Scholastic CodeX program. Most of our newcomer students also participate in extended day, as well as small group instruction during the school day based on need. c. Our plan for long term ELLs (4-6 years) includes access to extracurricular programs (funded by Title III funds). Long term ELLs are placed in an appropriate class setting based on their ELA and NYSESLAT levels, as well as other individual needs they may have (ie, students with disabilities, students in gifted classes, etc.). Most long term ELLs are given ENL instruction in a self-contained setting five times a week, with the exception of students with disabilities and students in gifted programs. Other students are supported within their content area classes by a push-in ENL teacher, and instruction is based on the content curriculum to which the teacher is pushing into. Many of our long term ELLs also participate in extended day. Based on need, long term ELLs also receive small group instruction and/or AIS services during the school day. d. Our plan for long term ELLs (6+ years) includes access to extracurricular programs (funded by Title III funds). Long term ELLs are placed in an appropriate class setting based on their ELA and NYSESLAT levels, as well as other individual needs they may have (ie, students with disabilities, students in gifted classes, etc.). Most long term ELLs are given ENL instruction in a self-contained setting five times a week, with the exception of students with disabilities and students in gifted programs. Other students are supported within their content area classes by a push-in ESL teacher, and instruction is based on the content curriculum to which the teacher is pushing into. Many of our long term ELLs also participate in extended day. Based on need, long term ELLs also receive small group instruction and/or AIS services during the school day. e. Former ELLs (1 to 2 years after testing proficient) are also invited to participate in extracurricular programs created for the general ELL population. For the first year after testing proficient, former ELLs are placed in ESL or ELA classes based on individual need. From the second year on, ELLs are then placed into ELA classes in lieu of ESL. Most former ELLs given ESL 8  instruction are in a self-contained setting five times a week, with the exception of students with disabilities and students in gifted programs. Other students are supported within their content area classes by a push-in ESL teacher, and instruction is based on the content curriculum to which the teacher is pushing into. Based on need, former ELLs also receive small group instruction and/or AIS services during the school day. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? An IEP team consisting of a special education teacher, a general education teacher, the school psychologist, the ELL coordinator and the special education adminitrator ensure that ELL-SWD receive their mandated services and that their programs reflect the appropriate hours of ESL. Our ENL teachers push in to our content classes to ensure all ELL students receive the proper support required. We have hired two new teachers this year in order to accommodate this push in model in the self contained and ICT classroom containing ELL-SWD. Teachers at IS 220 support students language, literacy and content learning by implementing numerous strategies and instructional methods including but not limited to: building academic language, integrating opportunities to use oral and written language for learning purposes, scaffolding for support, targeted grouping strategies, targeted formative and summative assessments, writing projects, and sharing projects to promote English language, literacy and content knowledge development. Teachers maintain high expectations for ELLs by providing standards based instruction while tailoring instruction to meet individual student needs. They use multiple modes of assessing learning including careful observations of students, performance-based portfolio entries, learner self assessments and testing accommodations for formal standardized tests. They provide students with access to common core curriculum facilitate English language development and afford students opportunities for social integration into their multicultural classrooms by offering comprehensible input for language acquisition. Teachers of ELLs make their context-embedded instructional talk more understandable by speaking clearly, repeating key points, defining essential vocabulary in context, and pairing talk with non verbal communication cues such as pictures, graphs, objects and gestures. In addition, teachers are aware and specifically develop appropriate language, content and social/affective objectives including a low-anxiety environment to promote language acquisition and content knowledge. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school looks closely at individual student needs and learning styles by analyzing past student portfolios, teacher anecdotal and test scores to assess appropriate interventions. We have developed an Inquiry Team and Professional learning communities (PLC) to examine trends and establish suitable learning environments. Teachers, administrators and support staff convene regularly for professional development, to discuss students individual educational plans, to fine-tune schedules if needed, and to address the complex composition of our schools population. Students with disabilities whose IEP recommends ESL services are programmed to receive ENL instruction in a pull out model. Alternate placement paraprofessionals are assigned to students whose IEP recommends Bilingual services. The frequency of instruction has been determined by their English language acquisition and NYSESLAT score. Students are motivated and supported through a strong school–to-home connection. Students with Disabilities and ELLs are strongly encouraged to participate in our extended day programs offered Wednesday-Thursday from 2:20-3:50 p.m. An early morning Academy has been established for additional support in Reading, Writing, Speaking, Listening, and Mathematics. Students who have been designated at risk receive focused attention and are offered a variety of interventions in an effort to prevent being referred to a committee on special education including but not limited to: Individual and group counseling, parent and school based support team conference, guidance intervention, at risk SETSS special education teacher support service recommendation for 6-8 weeks prior to a formal recommendation for special education services Students who are offered the above mentioned interventions and are still recommended for special education services obtain the school psychologists’ evaluation, receive a recommendation based on a school team comprised of a psychologist, social worker, mainstream teacher, and a special education teacher’s observations and analysis. Parents are invited to the council meetings and are given an opportunity to view the recommended learning environment. Students are always placed in the least restrictive environment at first and are monitored periodically to ensure proper placement. 9  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention for ELL students in the content areas includes instruction using ExC-ELL methodologies which practices a seven step immersion of vocabulary. Students are immersed in academic vocabulary building. Students also receive reading and writing in their content areas. Intervention programs such as, targeted AIS in Math and ELA, Wilson and Q-Tel are also contributing factors in our efforts to promote language acquisition among our ELL’s. The use of technology in the content areas also aids in the four modalities of reading, writing, speaking, and listening. Additionally, we provide our science and social studies teachers of ELLs with additional support using non fiction Benchmark leveled texts: Discover, Explorer and Navigator series. Our students are engaged in grade appropriate Common Core Learning Standards based reading and writing assignments with a major emphasis on analyzing questions and and supporting answers with text based evidence. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We have implemented an after-school and Saturday Academy where LTELLand SIFE students’ literacy skills in both their native language and English will be strengthened by training them to become historians of their ancestor’s immigrant experience in our neighborhood of Sunset Park. As data from the Research Institute of the Study of Language in Urban Society at CUNY shows, sife AND LTELLs benefit most from literacy development when it targets both their first and second language. In keeping with this finding, students will work on translating native language oral histories into English; using and deepening their skills in both languages. Students in this program will translate native language audio recordings from the archive of the Brooklyn Historical Society. These audio recordings date from the early Twentieth century. They record the life histories of members of the first wave of immigrants to Sunset Park, Brooklyn. Students will deepen both their native language and English literacy skills as they translate from their first language into their second. Crucial socio-emotional needs of participating students will be addressed through the project’s link to our students’ heritage, neighborhood, country of origin and country of residence. Through this project, students will honor the history of their own immigration, as well as the history of their community and neighborhood. Additionally, we have initiated a partnership with a Museum Educator from the New York Historical Society working with classes in our 7th and 8th grade collaborating on themes aligned with NYCDOE Social Studies scope and sequence. The school librarian has purchased and is investigating the use of e-books in multiple languages to improve students’ literacy in their native languages. We are also exploring how email and various online translation applications such as Google translate, Dragon Dictation, and Voice Recorder can improve comprehension and fluency for ELLs. Additionally, we have partnered with The Urban Arts Society and have adopted their “Story Studio” project in our Welcome classes for the last three years. Story Studio is a program where a collaborating teaching artist visits our classes once per week for 6 months and introduces artistic expression of the ENL curriculum. We are working with Marquis studio to implement two new residencies in our ENL classes. One program is an extension of our architectural program and the other will concentrate on building students in performance arts. Finally, we have partnered with MSQI and expect to incorporate some of their highly successful programs and practices into the work that we currently do. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We discontinued our "Making Books Sing" program because we have now incorporated music into our school curriculum 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs receive the same access to all school programs such as SMART Arts, ELL After-school programs, Champs, Beacon, Chess, Social Studies and science fair and targeted AIS instruction. Ells are programmed into the arts and music curriculum and the supplemental services of arts connection during the school day. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs have access to laptops and Ipads in their ENL classes. They are engaged in project based learning activities requiring the use of computers during several times throughout the curriculum units. Smartboards are installed in classrooms giving students the ability to interact in the lesson. 6th grade students have their own laptops. Our school has a strong technology program to support language acquisition for our ELL population. Students use various web based program that use differentiated non-fiction readings to boosts ELLs reading comprehension, fluency, and writing skill. Our school has partnered with Hunter College in a pilot program using iPads and Macbooks in the classroom to promote language acquisition. We are 0  exploring best practices through the use of these technologies. Specifically, we created units of study which use the Macbooks and iPads to create digital stories that are in sync with our current curricula. The technology is used in the drafting process and also for summative assessments. The Office of Education and Technology for District 20 is supporting the implementation of this pilot program. Results will be shared with the staff through our newly established Technology Committee. We anticipate moving away from the pilot stage and towards school -wide implementation in the late spring. Additionally, our ENL/ELA program from which our specifically aligned curriculum is derived is available to all students. Our classrooms are stocked with leveled, genre based libraries as well as native language fiction and non fiction texts. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? TBE Model: Home language support is delivered during the mandated Home Language Arts instruction. The instruction is delivered in Chinese. Students follow the literacy curriculum as mandated by the New York State Education department. The Home Language Arts classroom contains a classroom library in the native language. Certified Bilingual teachers deliver instruction in Math, Science, and Social studies. Students receive the mandated number of periods in HLA and the mandated number of minutes of ENL instruction guided by their score on the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT. ENL Model: All teachers of students in the Freestanding ENL program receive ExC-ELL (Expediting Comprehension for English Language Learners)strategies during professional development sessions provided by educational consultants of Dr. Margarita Calderon. Bilingual Dictionaries and Glossaries are used to support the native language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We have ensured that the required services support and resources are aligned with the student’s age, grade level and proficiency levels by adopting a robust curriculum that is unpacked by a grade team on an ongoing basis. Our grade teams meet and plan weekly during a common planning period and after school for a total of 3 weekly hours in a professional learning community. The goals of the teams include but are not limited to enriching the curriculum by adding relevant and appropriately motivating resources to assist students in understanding, and making meaning out of the texts. Teachers are diligent in making sure students are properly mastering the skills of reading, writing, speaking and listening. They are sensitive to the students cultural background and age and add or delete material as agreed upon by the team. This process is aligning, modifying and collaborating is continuous and is memorialized in our curriculum maps on Rubicon Atlas. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share a building, but ELLs have access to laptops and Ipads in their ENL classes. They are engaged in project based learning activities requiring the use of computers during several times throughout the curriculum units. Smartboards are installed in classrooms giving students the ability to interact in the lesson. 6th grade students have their own laptops. Our school has a strong technology program to support language acquisition for our ELL population. Students use various web based program that use differentiated non-fiction readings to boosts ELLs reading comprehension, fluency, and writing skill. Our school has partnered with Hunter College in a pilot program using iPads and Macbooks in the classroom to promote language acquisition. We are exploring best practices through the use of these technologies. Specifically, we created units of study which use the Macbooks and iPads to create digital stories that are in sync with our current curricula. The technology is used in the drafting process and also for summative assessments. The Office of Education and Technology for District 20 is supporting the implementation of this pilot program. Results will be shared with the staff through our newly established Technology Committee. We anticipate moving away from the pilot stage and towards school -wide implementation in the late spring. Our classrooms are stocked with leveled, genre based libraries as well as native language fiction and non fiction texts. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In late June, the parent coordinator organizes an orientation session for incoming sixth grade students. Translators are available. During the summer, the Beacon program provides opportunities for students to interact with currently enrolled students and offers classes for English language acquisition during the summer. New ELLs who enroll throughout the year are invited to attend our Homework program, Art through Writing morning program, ENL/Math targeted instruction am and pm 1  program, and Sife program. Our Newcomers teachers host a targeted Orientation Class specifically geared toward providing new non English speaking ELL's with the tools and resources needed to be be successful in American schools. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? The DL program includes an ENL component designed to develop skills in the four modalities in English. Ell students receive discrete ENL instruction and English proficient students receive comparable language instruction to develop all four modalities; Reading Writing, speaking and Listening. Science and Social Studies is are taught in the HL and English. In addition, a HL Arts component designed to develop skills in the four modalities in the students HL while cultivating an appreciation of their History and Culture is scheduled 5 x's per week or 225 minutes. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development and Support for School Staff ELL personnel receive professional development from various sources, including but not limited to the following: Hunter College, NYU, Fordham University, DELLS, Central District Offices, STEM, Project based inquiry, Advanced Literacy for Ells, ENL data analysis, Socratic Seminar, Maximizing Language development in the ENL classroom, Tech for teaching ELLs, Building academic language for ells, and enhancing student academic discussion in the ell classroom. We purchased a Platform from TEQ which allows teachers to choose and track their PD hours for CTLE and AVID. Additional support is provided from our ENL Coordinator and Literacy and Math Coachs. Additional professional development is offered by in house staff who have attended various PD's. Teachers turn key information during extended day time and lunch and learns. Furthermore, administration and support staff share relevant Ell specific information throughout the year during extended time and special scheduled PD's. The topics covered include: Common Core Learning Standards for ells, Understanding the screening, placement and assessment policy for ELLs , What is the LAP? . ATS Reports and how to use the data to align instruction t. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 2  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. School staff participates in a comprehensive series of professional development sessions hosted by a variety of sources including but not limited to; the ELL Coordinator and ENL specialists providing extensive support on ENL strategies and methodologies specific to assisting second language acquisition in middle school. Our guidance counselors provide professional development to our staff in order to help support students who are transitioning into high school. They invite International High schools to our building for a day of valuable information regarding admittance into these specialized Ell high schools. The guidance support group prepares a Career Day for the students and teachers when they are in the eighth grade. Our school is committed to ensuring that a minimum of 15% of the required Professional Development hours is dedicated to language acquisition with focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for our Ells. For Bilingual and ENL teachers we understand that the required PD hours must be a minimum of 50% of the required PD hours. We adhere to our PD plan and maintain a PD calendar on Office 365 to ensure that these mandates are met. Agendas and attendance records are maintained and kept in a PD binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are invited to our annual Open House and an orientation when they first enter the school building. Parents are invited to an annual Arts show during the school year. We also individually meet with the parents and guardians of English language learners at least once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians, to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This additional meeting includes school staff necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language development in all content areas in English and in the child’s home language in the case of students enrolled in a bilingual education program. Such meeting is conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. We determine the manner and form of such individual parent meetings, in accordance with collective bargaining agreements. We record attendance and maintain a record of the discussion. Student progress and recommendations for next steps are shared. A record of these meetings is kept in the Ell coordinators office. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parental involvement is a priority at our school and we engage parents of ELLs in a variety of ways. Parents provide feedback to the school through the annual environmental survey, and also respond to interest surveys which we use to develop our parent programming. We offer a range of evening and weekend classes for parents and guardians in G.E.D. preparation, English as a New Language, computer literacy, financial literacy, and accessing the ARIS system. We also have an active and 3  inclusive Parent-Teacher Association which meets monthly to celebrate student awards, present community resources, and discuss issues of concern. Parents of ELLs are invited to sit on PTA committees. We also make efforts to connect families of ELLs with community resources outside of the school, such as the Brooklyn Public Library. Our Parents are invited to ongoing workshops on topics of interest including but not limited to: Family Services, Health Insurance, and Middle School Success for Parents and Students, Immigration, and testing. Parents are updated during Open House about curriculum, school policy, Skedula, rules and regulations, school wide expectations and other important programs at the school. For parents who are not able to attend meeting or functions during the day we host additional sessions at night and on weekends. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Mr. Sheldon Dempster, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: IS 220 School DBN: 20K220 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Sheldon Dempster Title Principal Raquel Diaz Assistant Principal Shana Musler Parent Coordinator Kim Ihata ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jessica Garcia Parent Michelle RomanoELA/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Xuan/Math Teacher/Subject Area Sylvia Brennan Zenia Duran Coach Coach Heather Blasi School Counselor Karina Costantino Lucia Perez-Medina Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Evelyn Reily Other Psycologist S. Hirsh Other Speech Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/18 6/18 6/18 6/18 6/18 6/18 6/18 6/18 6/18 6/18 6/18 6/18 6/18 6/18 6/18 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 20K220 School Name: John J. Pershing Superintendent: K. Costantino The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Shana Musler Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Language preferences are obtained during the initial registration process in the oral interview with the parent and student and on the Home Language Survey. In addition, we review ATS and student emergency cards to ensure language data is up to date and accurate. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 7  Language The parents' preferred languages in our school are Chinese, Spanish, Arabic, Urdu, Bengali, Polish, and Uzbek Written Preferred The parents' preferred languages in our school are Chinese, Spanish, Arabic, Urdu, Bengali, Polish, and Uzbek Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral The parents' preferred languages in our school are Chinese, Spanish, Arabic, Urdu, Bengali, Polish, and Uzbek The parents' preferred languages in our school are Chinese, Spanish, Arabic, Urdu, Bengali, Polish, and Uzbek The parents' preferred languages in our school are Chinese, Spanish, Arabic, Urdu, Bengali, Polish, and Uzbek ARABIC BENGALI CHAM CHINESE ANY CHECHEN CANTONESE MANDARIN MOSSI (AKA MORE) ENGLISH STUDENT DOES NOT SPEAK PUNJABI (A.K.A. PANJABI) POLISH RUSSIAN SLOVAK SPANISH URDU UKRAINIAN UZBEK VIETNAMESE 24 73 0 1072 1 0 0 0 379 1 1 6 7 1 845 18 2 1 2 0.99 3.16 0.04 18.13 0 2.75 23.14 0.04 15.41 0.04 0 0.25 0.29 0.08 34.69 0.82 0.08 0 0.08 0.99 3 0 44.06 0.04 0 0 0 15.58 0.04 0.04 0.25 0.29 0.04 34.73 0.74 0.08 0.04 0.08 24 77 1 441 0 67 563 1 375 1 0 6 7 2 844 20 2 0 2 8  n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Documents that are translated and distributed to parents include newsletters, calendars, parent teacher conference announcements, after school program information, New York State testing dates, flyers, overview of the student curriculum and invitation letters. Dissemination of these documents occurs as soon as possible to ensure parents have access to programs and services critical to their child's education. Ongoing throughout the year and depending on particular event. Newsletter/Calendar Monthly PTC Announcements 4x's per year before conferences AIS morning and after school invitation and permission letters November and ongoing as needed Parent documents are translated by teachers, community liaison, secretaries, Parent and ELL coordinators, paraprofessionals and ,AP's,. When necessary we seek assistance from our colleagues in other schools and/or the Language and Translation unit Parent documents are translated by teachers, community liaison, secretaries, Parent and ELL coordinators, paraprofessionals and ,AP's,. When necessary we seek assistance from our colleagues in other schools and/or the Language and Translation unit. , Parent documents are translated by teachers, community liaison, secretaries, Parent and ELL coordinators, paraprofessionals and ,AP's,. When necessary we seek assistance from our colleagues in other schools and/or the Language and Translation unit. , Parent documents are translated by teachers, community liaison, 9  NYS Testing dates November Flyers/announcements for school events Ongoing Trip slips Ongoing secretaries, Parent and ELL coordinators, paraprofessionals and ,AP's,. When necessary we seek assistance from our colleagues in other schools and/or the Language and Translation unit. , Parent documents are translated by teachers, community liaison, secretaries, Parent and ELL coordinators, paraprofessionals and ,AP's,. When necessary we seek assistance from our colleagues in other schools and/or the Language and Translation unit. , Parent documents are translated by teachers, community liaison, secretaries, Parent and ELL coordinators, paraprofessionals and ,AP's,. When necessary we seek assistance from our colleagues in other schools and/or the Language and Translation unit. , Parent documents are translated by teachers, community liaison, secretaries, Parent and ELL coordinators, paraprofessionals and ,AP's,. When necessary we seek assistance from our colleagues in other schools and/or the Language and Translation unit. , 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences, Tuesdays during extended time, and at scheduled times during the day, as needed. see below PT Conferences 4 x per year one week before the conferences interpretation service(s)? Our school provides interpretation services in many ways including but not limited to the following: In house staff who speak the target language, use of the language and interpretation unit translator units, Google translate and school messenger. Our school provides interpretation services in many ways including but not limited to the following: In house staff who speak the target language, use of the language and interpretation 0  Tuesday Afternoons: Parent outreach Ongoing as needed Parent meeting with grade team Ongoing as needed Open House/ Curriculum night September and October Parent orientation September and ongoing based on registration date Individual Annual ELL Parent Meeting Ongoing as per parent availability PTA/ Leadership Meetings Monthly unit translator units, Google translate and school messenger. Our school provides interpretation services in many ways including but not limited to the following: In house staff who speak the target language, use of the language and interpretation unit translator units, Google translate and school messenger. Our school provides interpretation services in many ways including but not limited to the following: In house staff who speak the target language, use of the language and interpretation unit translator units, Google translate and school messenger. Our school provides interpretation services in many ways including but not limited to the following: In house staff who speak the target language, use of the language and interpretation unit translator units, Google translate and school messenger. Our school provides interpretation services in many ways including but not limited to the following: In house staff who speak the target language, use of the language and interpretation unit translator units, Google translate and school messenger. Our school provides interpretation services in many ways including but not limited to the following: In house staff who speak the target language, use of the language and interpretation unit translator units, Google translate and school messenger. Our school provides interpretation services in many ways including but not limited to the following: In house staff who speak the target language, use of the language and interpretation unit translator units, Google translate and school messenger. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 1  In the event of a school emergency our communication strategy is as follows: Telephone calls are made in the home language by staff, school messenger blasts are sent in the home language, emails via pupil path. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our school conducts department as well as building wide meetings to inform staff of Chancellors Regulation A-663 which ensures that Limited English speaking parents are provided with translation services and over the phone interpretation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school ensures that parents have notice of translated services by displaying posters in the entrance, the parent coordinators office, and main office. We also have parent brochures available indicating the various languages available for translation. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Annual parent surveys help us to gather feedback from our parents to ensure that we are providing the services they need. Also, parental concerns are communicated via the Parent Coordinator to the administration and are immediately addressed on the school website or on an individual basis as needed. 2 
