 22K236 School Name: P.S. 236 MILL BASIN Principal: SALIL PAINGANKAR   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 22K236 PS 236 Mill Basin 33220010236 PreK-5 6302 Avenue U Brooklyn NY 11234 718-444-6969 Phone Number: 718 241-6630 Fax: Salil Paingankar spaingankar@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 22 Email Address: Salil Paingankar LilianEspinal Diana Gershman Christine Goldzman N/A N/A N/A District Information Julia Bove Superintendent: 5916 FlatlandsAvenue Brooklyn NY 11234 Superintendent’s Office Address: jbove@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-968-6115 Phone Number: 718-968-6252 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn South MauriciereDeGovia FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89 th Street Brooklyn NY 11209 mdegovia@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-5131 Phone Number: 718-968-6252 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Salil Paingankar LilianEspinal Diana Gershman N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Gina Caputo Jennifer Lahmani Christina Goldzman Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Staff   Name Gabrielle Linchner Vanessa McMahon Anthony Stern ViolettaKosovsky Zoya Borrocas Tracey Arefiev Kathleen Sorrentino Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Staff Member/ Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The common goal of our school community is to collaboratively create a nurturing environment in which all children included ELL, special education and high achieving students meet and exceed the curriculum standards in order to become lifelong learners.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. At PS 236 we believe that children learn best when they are comfortable with the academic challenges they face as they work in a risk-free environment. Teachers foster this environment by conducting lessons that allow students to lead and let the educators facilitate, rather than dictate. Students are given opportunities to develop ideas via discussion and exploration with support from text based evidence. A partnership with families fosters a positive relationship between our school and the home. Every member of the school community will acquire all of the skills necessary to be a successful life-long learner, open to limitless possibilities and prepared for the challenges of a unique and diverse society. At our school, we believe that each student is an individual and needs to foster their own opinions and beliefs. Through appropriate instruction and enrichment of innate talents, students will meet high standards and reach their ultimate personal and academic potential. Respect and acceptance of each individual is at the heart of what we do. At our school, every child will excel academically and socially. Our school motto is “Lead By Example” thus developing our Leader-Chip program. Students have the ability to acquire tokens when they show attributes of leading by example. This program has been highly successful and has created a respectful tone throughout the building where students hold doors for each other, speak kindly to one another, and encourage and celebrate each other’s success. Our club program successfully continued this year. The clubs allowed students to try new activities such as cooking, meditation/yoga, painting, drama, weaving/looming, and a basketball team. Through the club activities, students learn how to communicate and work with their future colleagues in the career of their choice, with all activities geared toward College and Career Readiness. Collaborative teaching will also continue for the upcoming school year. Our teachers continue to learn from each other and partner up with one another as they learn from and share their best practices. To foster this initiative we will continue to have instructional walkthroughs that allow teachers to focus on an instructional area. Learning Partnerships (and triads) will continue for the upcoming school year as enhance teacher development, curriculum planning, and academic enrichment including STEAM initiatives. We are excited for the upcoming school year and ready for whatever challenges come our way! 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. This year we would like to focus on the lowest one third and help them progress in ELA and Mathematics. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We have made significant progress this past year, and we will continue to move forward to further our gains, as we enhance our supportive environment and strong community ties. In developing a supportive environment, students are able to discuss any issues with any adult in the building. Students now feel that they have a voice and their suggestions are heard and discussed by administration and school staff. The student council meets monthly with the principal to discuss student issues and events for the school. This year our council raised over $11,000 for various charities that help children in need. With an open door policy, the principal continues to listen and communicate with families with compassion and conveys his understanding of the difficulties many parents face in today’ world. These aspects allowed the school to build strong community ties as evidenced in the 2017-2018 school survey. Based on these findings, parents of PS 236 students feel very safe and confident that their child is getting a top-notch education. 0  While PS 236 has strived toward, and attained improvements in the education students receive, we will continue to enhance and deliver rigorous instruction. We continue to strive toward developing a level of instruction that our students need so they can be enriched and be even more successful. We will continue to focus on student development whereby students lead classroom discussions and develop their own higher order questions. For the 2018-2019 school year teachers will examine further strategies of debate and Socratic Seminar. We believe that implementing these philosophies will enable students to be “better thinkers and prepare them to work in a collaborative environment”. A second area of focus for the 2018-2019 school year will require us to take a deeper look at our math instruction, classroom practices and avenues of math development for students. New York State scores, school-wide data, and classroom data indicates that there is a need to address the methods and practice of delivery for math instruction. We have already taken our first steps towards this goal as we began professional development sessions for the teachers as they explored Common Core requirements for math instruction by grade level. Teachers will be able to fine tune their craft in the area of mathematics and develop a deeper understanding of the concept for students. Leadership in the building will oversee this professional development and enhancement to curriculum/instruction for the school year. Successful practices will be put in place and embedded within the delivery of math instruction. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 22K236 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 554 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 11 9 22 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 17 5 22 22 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 47.0% % Attendance Rate 39.2% % Reduced Lunch 5.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 14.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 50.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.87 0% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 71.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 94% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A YES N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 25 25 22 94.4% 7.8% 14.4% 20.9% 9.4% 4.9% 2 9% 8.2 74.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teacher teams have been established at each grade level. This year teams focused on curriculum mapping and tweaking lesson to fit the needs of all students. This year we feel we need to study trends , weaknesses and strengths in order to provide rigorous instruction in the area of Science. Identified as an area of focus by the staff instruction needs be targeted with subgroups in mind. Teachers need to meet and analyze student work in order to create best practices and differentiate Science Instruction. In collaboration with the schools in District 22, this year we will focus particular attention on Science instruction with all the students in mind. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of the 2018-2019 school year, 100% of classroom teachers will participate in professional learning designed to increase Science discourse through the planning and execution of Scientific Practices. As a result there will be a 3% overall increase in Science scores on school wide assessments. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Staff will meet on Professional Development Mondays for the work of inquiry, using an established protocol for analyzing student data across all grades, All Staff and Administration October 2018 to June 2019 The lowest one third will be identified when selecting student work for the cycle of inquiry. All students September2018 to June 2019 Professional development will be provided for staff in order to use the inquiry protocol to improve Science Instruction. All Staff Teacher will create new curriculum maps by examining guidelines in Science Fusion All Staff September 2018 to January 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, District Support , and Borough Field Center Support. Administration, Teachers and District support. Administration Teacher/Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will provide workshops that re aligned to units to help families understand Science concepts. The workshops will be every three months and administration will supervise the professional development. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff may use the professional development time on Mondays, time "for other professional work" on Tuesdays and common planning times for Inquiry. Specific instructional strategies will be offered to the lowest one third students during the school day. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 4  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administration will continually observe teachers and students to see how Science Instruction has improved in the classroom. Administration will monitor the progress of students in the lowest one third by reviewing data from various sources including Performance Series and Unit Exams . By February 2019 this goal will be measured ,by going through two cycles of Inquiry and participated in a school wide sharing of their findings and strategies. By mid year teacher teams will have created maps for at least half the Science curriculum. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The "2017" NYS Common Core Science Exam and Item analysis of unit tests given throughout the year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? After speaking to staff, students and families we thought that we need to focus on the progress of our students with disabilities. We feel that lesson need to be planned more according to Individual Education Plans and the needs of all students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of the 2018-2019 school year, all teachers will create a supportive environment by adapting instruction for all learners, but focusing on students with disabilities. As a result there will be a 3% overall increase in the Measure of Teacher Performance targeting the Danielson Framework 3: Student Engagement. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional development on how to read and understand an Individual Education Plan Instructional walk throughs with a focus on the styles of team teaching in an ICT classroom Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers September 2018 to November 20187 All Teachers November 2018-February 2019 Special Education Teachers and Administration Teachers and Administration 3 open houses on best practices in tailoring education to student needs. Al Staff and students March 2019-May 2019 Special Education Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be invited to participate in open houses and workshops will be given by teacher and the Parent Coordinator about the ICT classroom and the different strategies that are used in an ICT classroom. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Special Education Teachers, Administration and the Parent Coordinator will be used to achieve this annual goal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 7  By February the instructional walk through teams will communicate the progress of this goal by a memo based on the findings of the instructional walk through. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher observations with a focus on student engagement will be used to assess the progress of this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As follow up to Goal 5 a we feel that teachers need to get together and map the Science Curriculum. Teachers have to create a pacing calendar lessons that will service the needs of our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of the 2018-2019 school year, 100% of teachers will participate in professional learning and inquiry meetings to develop Science units. This will result in the creation of 5 units per grade. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Administration and staff will create a calendar for curriculum mapping days. During mapping days teachers will create lessons that will differentiate instruction for studetns with disabilites and English Language Learners. Parents will be invited to partake in open houses with staff members as they examine Science instruction. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom Teachers, Administration ELL Specialist, Special Education Teachers, and ELL and SWD students Families September, 2018 Administration and Teachers September, 2018-May 2019 Administration, Special Education Teachers and ELL Specialist November 2018, to April 2019 Administration, Teachers, Parent Coordinator How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be invited to observe Science lessons and will be given a professional development on the units of study. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Prep coverage and substitute teachers, time allotted Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 0  Teachers will provide feedback/reflection on Instructional Learning Walks and Learning Partner Reflection Log which apprise Administration of any changes and/or modification that might be necessary to these protocols. Administration will review data in February see where we are on the creation of Science units in each grade. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Observations and progress of Effective and Highly Effective teachers in Area 3C of the Danielson Framework during Science instruction. We will also look at the Sciene units created by each grade. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on PPO visits it was suggested that administration provide professional development for teachers in team teaching with a focus on ICT instruction. Teachers needed to create lessons that enhanced student engagement by using discovery and manipulatives. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of the 2018-2019 school year, 100% of teachers will receive a minimum of three formal or informal observations targeting student engagement with a focus on students with disabilities. As a result, there will be a 2% overall increase in the Measure of Teacher Performance targeting the Danielson Framework 3C: Student Engagement. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Provide professional development on how to engage while team teaching. All Grade levels Provide professional development in are 3c of the Danielson Framework for teaching. All Grade Levels Planning periods for teams to develop lessons Administration and Teachers Administration and District Support. Administration and District Support Administration September 2018-May 2019 September 2018-June 2019 October 2018-May 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be offered workshops from the parent coordinator on strategies the NYS Common Core exams. This will take place in January of 2018. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Flexible Programming and schedule. Common Core Curriculum and Specialty Teachers Great Leaps Kits. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 3  Administration will observe teacher teams to see their progress. An instructional walkthrough will update the staff on the progress, as well. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 Measures of Teacher Practice will be used as the guide to measure this practice. Data will be analyzed by administration and will develop professional development based on the results. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based upon the Learning Environment Survey parents stated that want to be invited more to the school for events. Teachers felt that they wanted parents to have a better understanding of the curriculum in order to help their child succeed. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of the 2018-2019 school year, 100% of classroom teachers will offer a minimum of two parent engagement opportunities per class during the school year. As a result, there will be an overall 3% increase in The Framework for Great Schools Parent Survey regarding parent involvement in the classroom. 5 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Families for all students including the lowest one third, SWD's and ELL students. Families for all students including the lowest one third, SWD's and ELL students All teachers and administrators October 2018-May 2019 Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Administration October 2018-May 2019 Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Administration. October 2018- December 2019 October 2018-May 2019 Teachers and administration Teachers and administration Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Host family workshops on Common Core Standards for Mathematical Practice and strategies as well as using the in line component for Go Math. Have at least one celebration a semester when parents are invited to participate. Provide professional development for staff in using Remind and Class Dojo in order to communicate better with the parents. Encourage families to sign onto Remind and Class Dojo and other communication sites. Families of all students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Common Planning Periods, Tuesday family Engagement time. Professional Development Mondays. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 6  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2018 introductory family workshops for Mathematics and ELA , encouragement for families to sign up for on line supports , as well as professional development for staff will have been offered. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The number workshops given by the school and number of families signed on to support sites. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students in the lowest one third and selected by teachers Mathematics Students in the lowest one third and selected by teachers Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, one to one, at risk services, and peer tutoring During the school day and after school programs. Small Group, One to One, Peer Tutoring. During the day and after school programs. Wilson, Fundations, RazKids, Performance Series, SuccessMaker, Star Fall, Brain Pop, Great Leaps, Discovery Ed, Wonderworks, IReady Math Mission, Math games, Math fact challenges, Great Leaps, SuccessMaker, Discovery ED, On line instructional videos, Extensive hands on use of manipulatives. Science Social Studies Students in the lowest one third and selected by teachers Pebble Go Discovery Ed N/A N/A At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students that show a need in the related service area SETTS, Occupational Therapist, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, School Psychologist Small Group, One to one, Peer Tutoring N/A Small group and one to one. During the school day and after school programs N/A 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We currently have 20 students. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  We are planning to provide services by creating an after school Academic Intervention Services program. This program will run from January to May and will be one day a week. Students that are temporarily housed will be offered a spot in the program. The program will help them excel in the area of English Language Arts and Mathematics as well as provide test sophistication strategies. We also will be providing various items such as clothing and school supplies if needed. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. PS 236 received 12000 dollars in this allocation. 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 1  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 12000 X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 3  4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S 236 Mill Basin, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 236 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 5  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 6  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 236 Mill Basin , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 7  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 8  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 9  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 0  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 1  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: For the 2018-2019 school year, we will have a Title III after-school program that will meet once a week for 1 1/2 hours per day. Our program will start January, 2019 and run through May, 2019. The classes will be taught by two ENL Instructors plus another teacher with a license and/or Master's Degree in technology. While the number of ENL students is currently 31, our CM students will also partake in this after-school program. The CM students that will be included are those ENL students who tested out the past two years. Our total student count for this program is 53 students. Our 31 ENL students are broken down as follows for the 2018-2019 school year: Kindergarten - unknown at this time, 14 First Grade Students, 7 Second Grade Student, 5 Third Grade Students, 4 Fourth Grade Students, 0 Fifth Grade Students (1 Fifth Grade student has been promoted to Middle School). Total CM students equals 22, spanning from 3rd Grade to 5th Grade. At this time, we do not have data to reflect the number of students who might have tested out of the ENL program nor do we have any data on the incoming ENL students for the 2018-2019 school year. Title III funds will be dedicated to creating an after-school program that will meet the needs of all of our ENL students who are at the various levels of ENL instruction. The data has revealed that the students continue to struggle with Listening Skills as well as Writing Skills (based on NYSESLAT results). School data has revealed that these students also struggle with mathematics, specifically word problems or Performance Based Assessments from our Go Math program. To meet these needs, the after-school program will be designed accordingly. As a means of expansion and enrichment, technology will be included in their 1 1/2 hours of instruction. The students will use Language Power for Grades 3-5, Level C to develop skills that need to be focused on. Students in Grades K-2 will use Levels A and B to meet their needs with text that is grade appropriate. Focused Reading Intervention from Teacher Created Materials will also be used for students in grades K-2. Direct instruction will be provide in English. On Our Way To English from Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Moving will also be used for this program as we integrate technology and writing with small group instruction. The program from Teacher Created Materials, Language Power, will be used for students K-5. The research based series provides ELLS with key reading comprehension strategies and incorporates writing skills driven from the foundations covered within the program. Additionally, students will also use Focused Reading Intervention kits aligned to grade level instruction. Passages from fiction and non-fiction stories drive the instruction and comprehension skills students need. Opportunities to enhance writing skills will be introduced as students create their writings in our computer lab. Emphasis will be on these two programs as the students in Kindergarten, 1st Grade and 2nd Grade are at emerging, transitioning and expanding levels. It is anticipated that for the upcoming school year, there will also be students at the beginning level. The after-school program, in conjunction with the programs from Teacher Created Materials, will allow students to increase their oral language skills as well as their literacy skills. Staff, including our ENL instructor, will deliver instruction to these students that 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information is differentiated, incorporating ENL methodology, and technology through our computer lab, thus enabling the students to be successful in the classroom as well as on the NYSESLAT exam. Students will receive supplemental instruction in Mathematics using the Success Maker program from Pearson. This on-line support, along with teacher instruction using ENL methodology, will increase proficiency levels with ENL students. This will be measured by results on PBA and other classroom exams. Students will attend the after school program on Wednesdays from 2:30 to 4:00 weekly, for a 20 week period. ENL instruction will be provided to students for 1 hour and 30 minutes. Each 30 minute session will allow students to focus on the following: 30 minutes dedicated to ENL instruction for language and written skills; 30 minutes dedicated to math instruction using ENL methodology and practice; 30 minutes technology support to enhance language acquisition and writing skills. Students will work in groups according level and grade bands. It is anticipated that the program will run from January, 2019 to May, 2019, with adjustments for holidays and other state testing. As described above, students will rotate within 30 minute periods. Prior to the start of the program (2:30 pm), students will have an opportunity to have a light snack (2:20 pm to 2:30 pm) which will cover the time from dismissal to the start of the program. Teachers will assess student progress and adjust instruction to meet individual needs as determined by teacher observations, student progress in their class and ENL class, formative assessments (running records, tasks, homeworks, writings on demand, data from the Pathblazer Program, PBA results and other chapter exams from Go Math). Supervision for this program will be provided by the Assistant Principal. The Assistant Principal will coordinate the program, supervise students for pick-up and dismissal of the program, coordinate meetings with support staff, providing them time for professional development, collection of data for assessment of program success, communication to families of students in program, and maintain all record-keeping documents related to this TItle III program. It is anticipated that supervision will need 40 hours for this program. There are no other after-school programs that are running concurrently with this program. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The staff at PS 236 will receive Professional Development in ENL methodologies by examining the following materials and partake in presentations to enhance their classroom instruction especially when addressing the needs of ENL students and parents alike. Workshops series from the Teaching Channel will be used on Monday after-school PD sessions to examine said methodologies such as https://www.teachingchannel.org/blog/2013/10/25/strategies-for-ell-instruction/ and http://www.scholasticom/teachers/article/10-ways-help-ells-success-math. We are scheduling 4 Monday PD Sessions, from 2:20 to 3:30 for the school year. These sessions will be school-wide. Sign in sheets will document teacher attendance along with agendas 4  Part C: Professional Development outlining topics covered. The school will include support from CITE for ENL instructional practices and has already started on this endeavor. Additionally, the ENL instructors at PS 236 will provide Professional Development to the general education teachers by turnkeying main ideas in a series of workshops they have attended. The ENL teachers have already attended the following workshops in preparation for this program: Maximizing Learning Opportunities for ENLs, Bilingual and Multilingual Learners; Supporting The Instructional Needs of SIFE; Instructional Units for Beginning ELLS; Building a System of Teams for ELLS; Building Reading Comprehension for ENLs Viewing and Reading Closely; Language Interpretation Training and Parent Communication Letters; Text, Talk and Tasks: Building a Pathway for Success for ENLs and All Learners. Additionally, they have attended workshops exploring various STEM programs and enrichment classes that will be included in our after-school program. These workshops were provided by the Department of English Language Learners and School Support and Division of Technology. Turn-keyed professional development will be provided to the staff at PS 236 three times per year and outlined by agendas and attendance sheets to support teacher instruction. Teacher Created Materials and Pearson will be included for the upcoming school year to provide professional development opportunities to our staff as we look at our ENL program. Professional Development on the Pathblazer program was attended in June, 2018. This pd allowed the teachers to explore various opportunities to include supplemental, on-line program to assess and increase math and English proficiency. Additional training for these programs will be provided by the DOE in the upcoming school year. The dates are to be announced in September, 2018. The postings for this Title III program will be compliance with UFT regulations and guidelines. The ENL instructors for this program will be Margarita Kazarian and Gina Caputo. The additional teacher will be determined on teacher response to the postings within the school and within the district who meet the requirements regarding technology and Pathblazer training. These teachers will be included in the training with Pearson and the Monday after-school professional development sessions. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parental involvement and support is monumental here at PS 236. Research has shown that when parents are actively engaged in their child's academic lives, the achievements of English Language Learners improves and students are successful in school. The parents at PS 236 have expressed an interest in becoming more involved in their child's education as well as their own integration into the community. To meet their needs, we will be hosting workshops at night, 5  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities inviting parents of ENL students to meet with the ENL instructors and instructors of the Title III program. The parents will be introduced to the programs that the students use, to wit: Language Power, On Our Way To English, and Success Maker. Support will be provided to make home connections whereby parents can explore the various websites that are available to them as a resource to assist students with their work, language acquisition as well as their own acquisition of language. Translation/translators will be available during these workshops to meet the diversified needs of this community. Parent workshops will be held in January, 2019 and April, 2019. Agendas and attendance sheets will document the format, topics and number of parents attending the workshop. Said workshop will be conducted by ENL instructors and those instructors in our Title III after-school program. Workshops will be held on a Tuesday and Thursday of these months, from 2:20 to 3:45 pm. All activities are posted in dual languages of Russian and English as those are the two dominant languages at PS 236. However, for our other ELL students, notices are translated on an individual basis to ensure all families are kept abreast of school activities, academic achievement of each student, and opportunities for parental involvement and support. These workshops will be in addition to those that the school conducts as a means of its parental outreach and support. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $7,419  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff $1,236 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. $2,475 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Per session salaries for 3 teachers and one supervisor for a 20 week program (1 1/2 hours per week) and 2 hours professional development session for 3 teachers (total 6 hours) for support. Professional Support/training from vendor to for Language Power Program and Focused Reading Intervention and Pearson Success Maker. Language Power Grades K-5, Levels B and C (kits include 10 copies of student workbooks), from Teacher Created Materials. Focused Reading Intervention Kits for Advanced ELLS, Grade K, 1 and 2 to supplement instruction (15 student books per kit). 3 Ipads to support three groups for Success Maker Program. 6 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Materials needed for cultural evening for parent involvement. $250 for refreshments for family engagement activities for ENL parents. (Funding used to cover the cost of set-up for paper goods, drinks (soda/water/juice), etc.) Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other $1,236 TOTAL $12,366 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 22 School Name Mill Basin School Borough Brooklyn School Number 236 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Salil Paingankar Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Margarita Kazarian Teacher/Subject Area Caren Schiffmiller (SETSS) Teacher/Subject Area Gina Caputo Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Joni Southard Coach School Counselor Nora McCarthy Parent Yunna Davydova Parent Coordinator Antoinette LaBella Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 8  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 547 Total number of ELLs 28 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 5.12% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? PS 236 uses several tools to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. Data from the NYSITELL is examined, as well as NYSESLAT results and Fountas and Pinnell reading levels. The F&P scores provide teachers with a student's independent reading level and instructional reading level. Differentiated instruction is then used as a springboard from the scores for said students. Teachers use on-level texts for the students in addition to instruction and data provided by the ESL instructor. Teachers test the students in F&P three times per year and track students progress. All results are sent to administration for assessment and evaluation. There are times when teachers will revisit the F&P levels and update student progress with running records from the assessment kit. Historically, ELL reading levels have ranged as follows: Kindergarten - AA - F; Grade 1 - AA - H; Grade 2 - C-K; Grade 3- E-O; Grade 4 - G-S; Grade 5 - G-S. The classroom teachers generate 9  assessments on a regular basis following the Common Core Standards. Assessments include the core subjects of ELA, Mathematics, Social Studies and Science. The data generated from these assessments assist the teachers with student grouping for instruction. Individual student needs are identified and aligned to meet those students who are at-risk, and who require scaffolding of instruction, additional support, as well as enrichment. These needs take into consideration student proficiency levels, and assist in mapping out instructional plans for those students needing AIS, Rti and any after-school opportunities that might be available during the school year. As of now, we have 28 ELLs in total, of whom 27 receive service 0-3 years, and 3 have disabilities. There are 0 SIFE or long-term ELL students, and 1 student that is a developing ELL (receiving service 4-6 years). Out of 28, 1 speaks Spanish, 19 speak Russian, 1 Bengali, 3 Urdu, 1 Arabic, and 3 other languages. The number of ELLs are broken down in the following way: 3 Entering, 3 Emerging, 6 Transitioning, 16 Expanding, 39 Commanding, with a total of 67. Out of 39 Commanding, the following represents the breakdown of former ELLs that tested out within the previous two years but continue to remain entitled to English as a New Language: 8 in Kindergarten, 8 in the first grade, 6 in the second grade, 7 in the third grade, 6 in the fourth grade, and 4 in the fifth grade. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? One such structure includes the Annual Measurable Achievement Objectives. The school looks to identify patterns across NYSESLAT modalities that will drive instruction through various intervention strategies such as level reading passages, ENL text, and ENL teaching strategies such as the use of realia in the classroom that address all student needs. The AMAO tool is used to identify and target possible at-risk ELL students and assist teachers in developing instructional plans that will help ELL students attain proficiency. Performance indicators that assist with ELL data is the AMAO tool. This combines information from NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, ELA and Math state exams. It also provides biographical information on studies and whether they fall into an at-risk category. There are weekly meetings, in which teachers meet by grade level in order to work on instructional planning. There are also monthly meetings for curriculum mapping. During these meetings, teachers use formative and informative assessments to drive instructional planning. The ENL teacher also generates assessments to ensure that the ELL population is meeting grade level expectations. These structures contribute to support ELLs' specific instructional plan. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our ELL program is evaluated in several ways. Primarily the results on the NYSESLAT exam indicate our success. With a high rate of students exiting the program and the majority making progress, the results yield a positive response. Secondly, we examine student success on NYS exams and the result on the MOSL exams that are selected by the teachers. For the lower grades, close analysis of Fountas and Pinnell results are indicative of the student success. Analysis of teacher-created exams and strands for instruction indicate each student's strength and area of concern so that instruction can be targeted. Assessment of all of these elements are reviewed as we determine the success of the program and areas that need to be re-evaluated. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The school uses the NYSESLAT and ELA assessments to determine student proficiency levels. At the end of the school year, the NYSESLAT is used to measure whether or not there is adequate progress in English language acquisition. The school analysis of the test results examines all four modalities with the results being used for planning and scheduling as well as its impact on the upcoming school year. Historically, the data shows that the school has a greater number of students entering the ESL program at the early grade level. Of those students entering, about one third of this population enter at the entering level, with the remaining two thirds scoring at the intermediate students entering. For those students who continue in the program in the upper grades, they continue their success, placing at the intermediate and upper tiers of proficiency. The number of students who enter the program at the upper grade level position are very low, with most of those entering students placing at the beginning level of instruction. In analyzing the data, those students who remain in the program demonstrate proficiency in Speaking and Listening and continue to require additional instruction in Reading and Writing. Instruction is provided to these students by offering lessons that emphasize on academic vocabulary, test taking skills and comprehensive responses to questions posed based on text. Teachers incorporate fiction and non-fictional text as well as culturally significant literature to increase this vocabulary and background knowledge. The instruction itself addresses the multiple intelligences by incorporating audio, tactile, and visual aids. Analysis of the NYS ELA exam also reveal that of those students who were former 0  ELLs and those still in the program, support is still needed. Most of the students score between Levels 2 and 3 in ELA and continue to receive additional support in the classroom by their homeroom teacher, continuous support from the ESL instructor, and opportunities to receive additional support after school in various programs that are targeted to their needs. These students score similarly on the NYS Math exam. Most students are accurate in areas of computation but struggle with word problems or those requiring an explanation. Again, these students receive the same support as they do in ELA. After-school programs incorporate math instruction as well as ELA. Science has been a hands-on study, with instruction built around the FOSS kits that are used for instruction and experimentation. ELLs that have taken the NYS Science exam have attained levels 3 and 4 on this exam. Teachers will continue to use this hands-on approach but will be incorporating a new program, FUSION, which will blend supplemental text and instruction to the hands-on approach the school has used in the past. All of the exams are given in English but ELLs are permitted to use bilingual word-to-word dictionaries for all subjects except ELA and NYSESLAT. Additionally, students are provided with written translations to ensure accurate measurement of the student's knowledge in the core subject. These practices have yielded positive results for our ELL students. This school administers MOSL tests to all of the student s in grades K-5. They are given twice a year (fall and spring). The school then uses the results to track student progress, analyze trends and develop rigorous instruction. Additionally, for students in Grades 3-5, the school administers the Scantron exams to provide yet a deeper analysis of student development and ability, thus fine tuning instruction to even further details so each student's needs are met. The data, and trends, are analyzed by the teachers during teacher team meetings, grade meetings, and discussed with administration. Classroom instruction is then modified to meet the needs of the students and include small group instruction. Professional development is provided to all classroom teachers under the guidance of the ENL instructor so that ENL strategies and methodologies are in practice in all classrooms. From the test results, the school is learning that the upper grade ELL students require various strategies in reading, comprehension and grammar and apply the same to writing practices. New ELL students are encouraged to express themselves orally in their native language so they can participate in literary activities. This fosters a sense of community as they are encouraged to participate and be included with the active members of the school community. Additionally, their self-esteem is boosted as their partake in all activities. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The data for our ELL students is used to assess their needs as it pertains to ELA, Mathematic and Science instruction. Based on data from Performance Tasks, Scantron, Success Maker, Fountas and Pinnel and teacher-made assessments, RTI groups are established for students in grades 2-5. Kindergarten and 1st grade students worked within the frameworks of RTI interventions (tiers 1 and 2) from within the classroom and in conjunction with the ESL teacher. Instructional support is also offered during the after-school program meeting two times per week. Student progress is tracked and monitored, with individual lessons aligned to student need and devised to ensure success for each student on the NYESESLAT exam. Upper grade students are given Tier 1 and Tier 2 interventions within the classroom and Tier 3 interventions with the ESL instructor and Wilson trained teacher for 1:1 instruction. Additional support is provided for these students in after-school programs that will meet twice a week. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data reveals that the students at PS 236 initially become proficient in Listening and Speaking, while Reading and Writing are acquired at a slower rate. Each year, approximately 33% of the ESL population attain proficiency, with 57% showing improvement, and 10% remaining at the same level. The majority of the ESL students in grades K-2 historically attain proficiency quickly while those students in Grades 3-5 attain proficiency in Listening and Speaking but slow down in their progress for Reading and Writing, regardless of the levels attained in the NYS ELA exam. The success of our ELL program is evaluated in several ways. Primarily the results on the NYSESLAT exam indicate our success. with a high rate of students exiting the program and the majority making progress, the results yield a positive response. Secondly, we examine student success on NYS exams and the result of the MOSL exams that are selected by the teachers. For the lower grades, close analysis of Fountas and Pinnell results are indicative of the student success. Analysis of teacher-created exams and strands for instruction indicate each student's strength and area of concern so that instruction can be targeted. 1  Assessment of all of these elements are reviewed as we determine the success of the program and areas that need to be re-evaluated. Even pre- and post-assessments are actively used to evaluate independent reading time. ELLs are evaluated in all four modalities throughout the school year. Students are assessed using formal and teacher-generated tests, tools, and materials. To assess in Speaking and Listening, evaluations are made based on how the students engage in conversations including, but not limited to, discussions during group work, classroom responses, presentations, discussions that build upon other student ideas, questions they pose to staff and other students, oral reports and responses to literature. To evaluate the students in Reading, the school looks at how the student uses context clues to determine the meaning of words, compare and contrast themes and the skills they use to ascertain this, finding settings, plots and understanding author's purpose. To assess the students in writing, the teacher looks at various writings including response to literature, writing opinion essays, how-to essays, etc. Students are instructed using various stages of the writing process; therefore, the instructors assess the students' planning and pre-write, revising and editing process to determine if assistance and reinforcement of these concepts are necessary. When needed, the results of these assessments then further drive the students' instruction. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers of students who are ELLs are identified at the start of the school year and their data is verified that they are correctly flagged in ATS with the appropriate indicators and test modifications as allowed by New York State. The ELL instructor plans and coordinates instructional lesson plans that are aligned to these student's needs and adapted as deemed necessary. This school uses ReadyGen for its reading program, GoMath for its math instruction, and Fusion for its science program. These programs have ESL components that adapt the lesson for ESL instruction. Additionally ESL supports are included for the students on a daily basis. Supports include dictionaries, ample verbal strategies to promote speaking skills, bilingual dictionaries, glossaries and websites with components for ESL development. all are employed as we strive to move all students, including the ESL population, to being College and Career Ready. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The ESL students at PS 236 receive freestanding ENL and all ELLs are taught by a licensed, certified ENL instructor. All ENL-entitled students are served by the push-in/pull-out model. In the push-in model, the ENL teacher works with ELL in collaboration with the general education teacher to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support, using ESL methodologies. The common preparation time between classroom teachers and the ENL instructor allow for said planning and collaboration. This alignment of instruction ensures accurate delivery of subject matter as well as meeting the students' language acquisition needs. In the pull-out model, the ELLs spend the majority of their day immersed in all-English content instruction but are brought together from various classes for English acquisition-focused instruction given by the ENL instructor All students participate in the above models and receive instruction based on their NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores in accordance with State mandates. b. TBE program. If applicable. This is not applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. This is not applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ELLs receive appropriate numbers of instructional minutes according to their proficiency levels as outlined in CR Part 154. For those students who are Beginer/Entering ELLs, they will receive 180 minutes in standalone ENL and 180 minutes in integrated ENL/ELA for a total of 360 minutes. Low Intermediate/Emerging ELLs receive 90 minutes in standalone ENL and 180 minutes in integrated ENL/ELA, with 90 flexible minutes, all totaling 360 minutes. Intermediate/Transitioning ELLs receive 90 minutes in integrated ENL/ELA and 90 flexible minutes for a total of 180 minutes. Advanced/Expanding ELLs receive 180 minutes in integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. Proficient/Commanding ELLs receive 90 minutes in integrated/ENL or other content area. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. General education teachers and the ENL instructor use ENL methodologies during instruction to provide a classroom environment whereby all ELL students can acquire academic content knowledge as well as language acquisition. ENL instructor uses a push-in model of delivery of instruction after careful planning with general education classroom teachers. This ensures that all ELL students receive instruction of curriculum that is aligned to grade and content and Common Core Standards driven. ELL students are taught all four modalities of listening, speaking, reading and writing with adjustments to instruction to allow for emphasis on those modalities that they may have shown a need for. We combine a maximum of 2 continuous grades for grouping. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish-speaking students are testing using the Spanish Lab test. For those students whose language is other than Spanish, they are not tested in their native language other than the initial interview. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. At this time, there are no SIFE students in the school. Should the situation change, the instructional plan that will be put in place will reflect differentiated instruction resulting from the student's scoring data, indicative of their levels and needs. Should the student have special needs, then a full-time bilingual paraprofessional would be assigned to the student. By doing this, the students academic, social, developmental and emotional needs are met with this additional support. b. For ELL students who are in a US school less than 3 years, the goal is to first acclimate the student to their surroundings and emphasize adaptation skills. This includes every-day language, and conversational skills. Students are instructed so that they become familiar with concepts that include letters, sound systems of the English language, vocabulary and then flow into academic skills, incorporating with any skills they may already have (ie. math computation). c. For ELL students who are in a US school 4-6 years, the goal is to increase literacy especially in the areas of reading and writing a data has revealed this to be an area of need for our ELLs in this category. The students are exposed to a larger variety of literature with a greater range of genre and author styles. ELLs are exposed to non-fiction literature as well as content based instruction so real-life connections can be made. An after-school program allows students to further develop these skills in the areas of Math, ELA and technology. Test Prep programs that are conducted after-school also allow ELL students the chance to identify skills needed in order to be successful on the NYSESLAT exam and NYS ELA and Math exam. d. Currently there are no long-term ELL students at PS 236. If, in the future, this should change, then the school will use data to target each student's weakness and strength, to drive their instruction, individualizing their plan of instruction, so they can 3  become college and career ready. e. The ENL instructor works collaboratively with the classroom instructor to provide extra support and materials to further enhance the ELL student's academic development. ENL instructors will continue to work with these students for 90 minutes on a weekly basis to continue their support. The test coordinator meets with classroom teachers to ensure that test accommodations continue up to 2 years after passing the NYSESLAT exam with said accommodations in place for all exams including NYS ELA and Math exams. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of students that are ELL-SWD use a variety of grade-level materials and strategies that provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development. This includes, but is not limtied to, differentiated instruction, scaffolding, pre-teaching using Total Physical Response, making fiction/non-fiction connections (text to self, etc.) vocabulary tests, higher-order thinking skills, DOK questions, Socratic Seminar and productive struggle problems. Realia used by teachers address the multiple intelligences and ensure that ELL-SWD's continue to develop their academic skills all striving toward academic success leading to college and career readiness. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? This school uses curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility to ensure ELL-SWD students achieve IEP goals as well as English proficiency in a least restrictive environment. This includes the input of the classroom teacher, special education coordinator and administration in scheduling the students academic classes and support services. Together, these educators form a "team" that supports and ensures the success for the student. The students schedules are evaluated and assessed, as the upper grades are now departmentalized and careful scheduling must be examined. Supports include AIS instruction, SETTS, possible one-to-one bilingual paraprofessional (full-time or part-time), counseling, invitations to any after-school programs the school might have that year, Great Leaps reading program, Rti, and any other programs that are available to the school. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELL students are tested in the areas of Mathematics (grades 3, 4 and 5), and Science (grade 4) in compliance with the NY State mandates. For those students who have been in the public school system for more than one year, they are tested in ELA as well (grades 3, 4 and 5). For those students who score levels 1 or 2 on these exams, intervention services are provided to the students both during the school day, and after school if programs and funding are provided. During the school day, ELL students receive additional support through AIS periods by classroom instructors, out of classroom instructors, and the ENL instructor. After-school programs (Title III) support their AIS needs by providing opportunities to work with staff in a small group setting, using Ready New York enhancement, I-Ready online support, ReadyGen ESL support. Home language dictionaries, bi-lingual glossaries, Star Fall and Raz Kids reading programs also enhance student reading skills and enhance the language connection for theses students. School activities that include cultural explorations (food, customs, home language, and other realia enhance student understandings and foster the language/reading/life connection. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The school will embark on additional ELL Parent Workshops that will be incorporated into the PA meets to increase attendance. Teacher professional development meetings for the teachers of ELLs will be increased to a 6 week-cycle. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We do not have any programs or services for ELLs that will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 4  ELL students have access to all activities in the school during school hours and after-school programs. This includes club times during the school week for upper grade students, opportunities to assist in monitoring lower grade students, all "bees", Saturday program, after school violin program, dance program, and essays and contests. Parents of ELL students are informed of the upcoming school programs and activities and updated on their start. Translations and interpreters are available to apprise parents of these programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instruction materials, including technology, are used to support all of the ELLs at PS 236. The school uses curricular, instructional materials and flexible scheduling to support their needs. This includes a variety of text, reading resources, educational computer programs specifically designed for ELL students as well as other programs designed for the general school population, classroom libraries, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, etc. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is delivered to ELLs in our freestanding ENL push-in program using text that is dual language, bilingual dictionaries, glossaries, and pairing students with other students who have the same home language. Bilingual staff assist these students throughout the day as they make progress adjusting to the school schedule. Parent support is provided by offering translated notices and having interpreters available for meetings and conferences. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services/resources correspond to ELLs ages and grade level based on ATS data and other soft data. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instruction materials, including technology, are used to support all of the ELLs at Ps 236. The school uses curricular, instructional materials and flexible scheduling to support their needs. This includes a variety of text, reading resources, educational computer programs specifically designed for ELL students as well as other programs designed for the general school population, classroom libraries, bilingual dicitonaries and glossaries, etc. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The school assists newly enrolled ELLs before the start of the school year by providing support from the ENL instructor, school psychologist, guidance counselor, social worker, and administration. Parents and students are invited to tour the school and become familiar with the surroundings to alleviate any concerns they might have when they start the school day. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The school does not have electives as this is an elementary school but offers enrichment "electives" in the form of clubs (by student choice), class trips that are scheduled around New York City (museums, performances and other places of interest), Title III programs if funding is available, and the opportunity to attend the after-school program that is run by a Community Based Organization. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? This question does not apply to our school. 5  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The professional development plan for ELL personnel at the school includes the ability and scheduling of our ENL instructor to attend all PD sessions provided by the DOE and district offices. The ENL instructor, along with administration, continuously search various avenues for PD sessions that will enhance methodology practices. Once information is obtained, this information is then turn-keyed to staff of ELL students, and then to the remaining staff at the school. Certified ENL teacher will conduct professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 is dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Emphasis is placed on giving teachers of ELLs support as they engage their students in reaching the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL materials and resources are provided to those classroom teachers who have ELLs. The PD sessions will cover but are not limited to the following list of topics: * Using Data to Drive Instruction * Keeping ELLs in Mind * Teaching Reading and Writing using ENL Methodologies * Using Classroom Glossaries and Dictionaries * Differentiating Instruction for ELLs * Scaffolding Language and Learning * Content Area Instruction and Assessment for ELLs * Examining Key Facts About the Home Countries of Our Ells * Sharing Best Practices * Engaging ELLs in Math lessons * Math Modeling Effective Teacher moves that support ELLs * The Importance of Allowing ELLs to Grapple with the Complexity of Math 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Support has been given to the 5th grade teachers to address the concerns of those students who might be ELLs that will transition from elementary to middle school. Historically, the school has not had a 5th grade ELL student but should this arise in the future, the teachers will receive professional development and additional support in helping to guide these students for this transition. The teachers will be instructed on the vocabulary they will encounter while at middle school, as well as life skills they will need to navigate in middle school. Suggestions and recommendations are given to the teachers regarding how to assist ELL student as they make this transition, including the middle school application process. Support for the teachers and parents is provided by the Parent Coordinator and ENL instructor as they explore all options that are available to the ELL students. In order to meet the requirements under CR Part 154.2, the school sets aside time on the first day of school for school-wide professional development. Additional time is allotted for this pd throughout the school year and in accordance to teacher schedules as blocks of time ("Common Planning Time") is scheduled into the 5-day school program. Agendas and attendance records are kept on file with school staff to ensure staff development is completed, timely and addressing the needs of our students and staff. Teachers bring to said sessions questions, concerns, data, etc. for those ELL students that are in their classrooms. All staff receives this instruction and opportunities to ensure equity throughout the school year. 6  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL instructor meets with parents/guardians individually at least two times per year in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, progress meetings and weekly conferences available every Tuesday after-school, conferences to discuss the results of their child's NYSESLAT score and other assessments that measure their success in ENL instruction. All meetings have translations available for printed documents, bilingual staff accessible and access to the DOE Translation/Interpretation Unit, when needed. Meetings are documented and kept on file with the classroom teacher and ENL instructor. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The parent coordinator and ENL instructor stress the importance of parent involvement and provide resources to the parents of ELL students outlining how they can help their children be successful both academically, socially, improve language acquisition, and test successfully on all exams. Parents receive information via emails, text and twitter , and in print indicating the resources available including those resources available on-line that support the programs used by the school (including Dial-A-Teacher access). At PS 236, all parents are invited and encouraged to attend school activities as well as community events and other organized events. The school continue to offer hands-on workshops for parents with all translations and interpretations available to the parents at all times. Parents of other ELL students who are bilingual are asked to reach out and encourage other families to join in our activities and celebrations. Multi-cultural celebrations, art fairs, holiday celebrations and school shows, plays, assemblies, etc. include invitations to all parents, via translated communication. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. When a new student enters our school, the following steps are taking for the initial identification of ELLs. Step 1: Administration of the Home Language Identification Survey The school administers the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) to determine the student's home language as part of general intake procedures. The home language is determined based on the combination of the interviews with the parent and student, and responses to the questions on the HLIS. As per CR Part 154, a licensed pedagogue completes the HLIS with the parent and ensures timely entry of this information into the designated ATS screens by the Pupil Accounting Secretary. Our licensed pedagogue is trained in cultural competency, language development, and the needs of English language learners. She is also proficient in the home language of the student or parent or guardian or uses a qualified interpreter/translator of the language or mode of communication the student or parent or guardian best understands. The completed HLIS forms are placed in the student's cumulative file and remain as part of the student's permanent record. If the student's home language is English, the ELL Identification Process continue to Step 2. Step 2: Determination of NYSITELL Eligibility For students whose home language is not English, the school then administers a more in-depth interview, reviews their school work (if available), and review the Individualized Education Program (if applicable), in order to determine NYSITELL eligibility (whether the student should take the NYSITELL). The school continues the process with a trained pedagogue who must do the following: 1. Interview the student in both English and the home language 2. Review student's prior school work in reading, writing, and mathematics, in both English and the home language. In the absence of sufficient school work, our school uses age- and grade- appropriate informal, culturally sensitive, school-based assessments or formal and informal screeners. A school determines eligibility to take the NYSITELL. If the student is ineligible to 7  take the NYSITELL, the ELL Identification Process terminates at this step. If the student is eligible to take the NYSITELL, we continue to step 3. NYSITELL eligibility for students entering school with IEPs (from within the United States) is based on the determination of the Language Proficiency Team (LPT). Step 3: Administration of the NYSITELL Our school prints NYSITELL answer documents using the RLB function in ATS. After the NYSITELL exam is administered, answer documents are scanned into ATS via the attendance scanner within 10 school days of enrollment. Within 5 school days of ELL determination, we inform parents of the results of the NYSITELL and ELL status using the NYCDOE standard parent notification letters in the parents' preferred language: Entitlement Letter, Non-Entitlement Letter, Continued Entitlement Letter. Dated and signed letters are retained in the student's cumulative folders. Step 4: Administering the Spanish LAB If Applicable: All new entrants whose HLIS responses indicate a home language of Spanish and who are newly identified as ELLs based on NYSITELL results are administered the Spanish LABa at the time of initial enrollment (or re-enrollment) during the same 10-day testing window. The Spanish LAB is used to support our school in instructional planning in providing bilingual and English as a new language (ENL) services to these students. Spanish LAB results are not used to determine ELL status or service entitlement. We print Spanish LAB answer documents using the RLBA function in ATS. After the Spanish LAB is administered, answer documents are scanned into ATS via the attendance scanner within 10 school days of enrollment. Identification of Students with Interrupted/Inconsistent Formal Education (SIFE) Students with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) are ELLs who have attended schools in the United States (the 50 states and the District of Columbia) for less than twelve months and who, upon initial enrollment in such schools are two or more years below grade level in literacy in their home language and/or two or more years below grade level in mathematics due to inconsistent or interrupted schooling prior to arrival in the United States. Within 30 school days from initial enrollment we make an initial SIFE determination. Identifying SIFE status begins at the time of the completion of the Home Language Identification Survey when the parent is asked to indicate prior schooling. We follow all of the same steps as outlined in the aforementioned questions to identify an ELL. If there are limitations within the ELL Identification Process that a student has had an interruption or inconsistency in their formal schooling, we proceed as follows for newly identified ELLS, and in grades 3-5 and at the beginner/entering or low intermediate/emerging level of proficiency as indicated by the NYSITELL results: SIFE Identification Process 1. We administer the oral interview questionnaire. 2. For those students who have a home language of Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, Haitian Creole, or Spanish, we administer the Literacy Evaluation for Newcomer SIFE (LENS). We indicate initial SIFE status in the DOE's data collection systems no later than 30 days from initial enrollment (BNDC). As per CR Part 154, we have up to 1 year to make a final determination of SIFE status; therefore, initial SIFE identification within the 30 days may be modified for up to one year. SIFE status is removed once the ELL scores at intermediate/transitioning level or higher on the NYSESLAT. NYSITELL eligibility for students entering school with IEPs (from within the United States) is based on the determination of the Language Proficiency Team (LPT). Beginning with the 2017-2018 school year, we will have an LPT that is at minimum, comprised of: 1. A school/district administrator 2. A certified teacher or related service provider or a teacher of English to speakers of other languages 3. The director of special education or individual in a comparable title (or his or her designe) 4. The student's parent or guardian A qualified interpreter or translator of the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands, will be present at each meeting of the LPT. Parental surveys reveal the needs of the school community. During Parent Association meetings, workshops and other school 8  activities, the availability of the parent coordinator and support staff at the school are stressed so as to meet the needs of the parents. Surveys are presented that ask the parents to identify the needs and interests so the school can look at providing same. The parent coordinator ensures that DOE brochures outlining the Parents Bill of Rights is provided to all ELL parents (and the parents of the student body at large) so there is equity in identifying the needs of the school community. Parents' needs are addressed through parental involvement activities. Surveys are sent to parents that determine areas of concern. Workshops can be created to address these needs that are specifically designed for the parents of ELL students as it pertains to areas such as state testing, social skills, social activities at PS 236, school policies, etc. 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Salil Paingankar, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 236 School DBN: 22K236 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Salil Paingankar Title Principal Joni Southard Assistant Principal Antoinette LaBella Parent Coordinator Margarita Kazarian ENL/Bilingual Teacher Yunna Davydova Parent Gina Caputo Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Nora McCarthy School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/30/17 9/30/17 9/30/17 9/30/17 9/30/17 9/30/17 9/30/17 1 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: PS 236 Superintendent: Ms. Bove DBN: 22K236 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Margarita Joni Kazarian Southard ENL Instructor Assistant Principal Yes No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Based on the information obtained from the HLISs, ATS reports, parent surveys, and meetings that are held face-to-face with parents, the primary language spoken by parents is determined by the parents and school personnel at the time of registration. As the school year progresses, side-notes are made to indicate the preferred spoken and written language and adjustments are made. Using the data, the school provides assistance to all non-English speaking parents so communication in their native language is available. The helps the parents and staff with effective communication that fosters the success of their child. Notices are posted throughout the school in various languages to inform parents of the availability of translation services as well as upcoming events. 2  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali (Bangla in Bangladesh) Bihari Chinese Cantonese Greek Hebrew Korean English Punjabi (aka Panjabi) Romanian Russian 6 3 1 15 0 0 7 2 0.6 0.3 0.1 1.5 0 0 0.7 0.2 6 3 1 12 6 1 8 2 0.6 0.3 0.1 1.2 0.6 0.1 0.8 0.2 898 88.9 882 88.2 2 2 44 0.2 0.2 4.4 2 2 52 0.2 0.2 5.2 3  Spanish Urdu Ukranian Uzbek 9 9 1 1 0.9 0.9 0.1 0.1 9 11 2 1 0.9 1.1 0.2 0.1 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. There are no parent preferred languages that represent at least 10% of the school population, other than English and Russian. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. . . . . . . 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings Initial Parent interview Upon admission; September and ongoing, as needed For in-person meetings, interpretation services are provided by bilingual staff members when possible. When necessary, our school utilizes an over-the-phone interpreter from the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. 4  ELL Orientation Meeting September Grade Level Orientation Meeting Parent-Teacher Conferences September Quarterly Scheduled Parent Meetings As Needed Annual ELL Meeting Individually scheduled for each parent throughout the year. For in-person meetings, interpretation services are provided by bilingual staff members when possible. When necessary, our school utilizes an over-the-phone interpreter from the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. For in-person meetings, interpretation services are provided by bilingual staff members when possible. When necessary, our school utilizes an over-the-phone interpreter from the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. For in-person meetings, interpretation services are provided by bilingual staff members when possible. When necessary, our school utilizes an over-the-phone interpreter from the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. For in-person meetings, interpretation services are provided by bilingual staff members when possible. When necessary, our school utilizes an over-the-phone interpreter from the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. For in-person meetings, interpretation services are provided by bilingual staff members when possible. When necessary, our school utilizes an over-the-phone interpreter from the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, our school has various strategies in place to reach limited-English-proficient families. Upon admission, parents/guardians of students must fill out three blue cards with emergency contact information and specific instructions for each individual student. One card is kept in the main office, another in the nurse's office, and the last is kept with the classroom teacher. On these cards, the guardians' preferred language is listed, along with descriptions on what to do in the case of an emergency. For parents/guardians who speak languages other than English, as indicated on the students' blue cards, bilingual staff are utilized for interpretation services in the 5  case of a school emergency. When necessary, an over-the-phone interpreter is used from the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our school ensures that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 throughout the school year. During faculty conferences, ELL Professional Learning meetings, and grade meetings, ENL instructors provide information and details from CR A-663 to ensure all staff members are meeting compliance. In addition to these ongoing meetings, the ENL teacher is utilized as a resource for classroom and out-of-classroom teachers. The ENL teacher has a hard copy of CR A-663 so that staff members can use it as a reference. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) It is this school's responsibility to provide parents who primary language is other than English and who might require language assistance with a copy of the Bill of Parents Rights and Responsibilities. This document includes their rights as it pertains to translations and interpretations services. The translated versions of this document are available on line at: http://schools.nyc.gov/RulesPolicies/ParentBillofRights/Parents+Bill+of+Rights+and+Responsiblities.htm. The school has posted by the main entrance of the school signs that indicating the availability of interpretation services as well as language assistance and directives posted by the security desk. The school follows the procedures outlined in the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit website in order to meet the translation needs and interpretation requirements set forth in Chancellors Regulation A-663. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school gathers feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services via the parent survey, parent workshops, ELL parent workshops, and input obtained from individual parent meetings with staff. 6 
