 21K239 School Name: MARK TWAIN I.S. 239 FOR THE GIFTED & TALENTED Principal: KAREN DITOLLA   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: 332100010239 6-8 2401 Neptune Avenue 718-266-0814 Section 1: School Information Page School Information Mark Twain Intermediate School for the Gifted and Talented School Number (DBN): 21K239 718-266-1693 Fax: Phone Number: Karen Ditolla KDITOLL@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Karen Ditolla Jason Batus Christina Johnson Courtney Williams N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 21 Superintendent’s Office Address: Isabel DiMola Superintendent: 1401 Emmons Avenue, Brooklyn N.Y. 11235 idimola@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718- 648-0209 Phone Number: 718- 648-2165 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn South Field Support Center FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Mauriciere Degovia Executive Director: 415 – 89 th Street Brooklyn NY mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 439-5699 Phone Number: 718 240-3600 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Karen Ditolla Jason Batus ShirlyChin Leah Scott ShpresaJashari AnattaLevinsky Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Andrea Repole Helen Verveniotis Marianne Russo Courtney Williams Britney Golembe Laurie Gervertzman Allison Shapiro Christopher Rodriguez Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement / Definition of Rigor- Section 4: CEP Overview We envision our school as a community of life-long learners where all members, students, staff, and parents are actively engaged in the educational process. Staff and parents are focused on empowering all students with the academic skills and rich civic, social, and arts experiences that will enable them to further their educational goals and become active, responsible, and positively contributing members of society. Students will develop important decision-making, critical thinking, and technological skills, and the ability to communicate effectively. All members of our   school community will share accountability for creating a positive, supportive, and nurturing environment, and for achieving successful student outcomes through high quality, relevant learning experiences. We seek to raise the level of rigor across all subject areas for all students. Our collaborative definition of rigor is: Rigor is the level of complexity and impact of the challenges of the curriculum and instruction as it pertains to the individual student. The outcome should demonstrate that the learner knows and can do more then he or she did before the instruction. We hope to challenge students to master complex tasks and appreciate the value and applicability to subsequent tasks. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The mission of Mark Twain Intermediate School for the Gifted & Talented is dedicated to the promotion of excellence in achievement in a climate of integrity, positive human relations, and respect for our society. We hope to inspire our students to "Explore Dream, Discover." Twain sets itself apart from others with its dual mission. Students are immersed in an environment of academic rigor blended with a full visual art and performing arts experience, in a supportive environment. Twain is organized into clusters, or mini-schools, with a team of teachers assigned to each. Clusters are scheduled for conference periods to collaborate and facilitate interdisciplinary planning, engage in data analysis to support student outcomes and communicate regularly with parents to discuss student progress. This helps teachers and families strategize and focus their instruction to suit individual student needs. Cluster teachers ensure that tutoring and/or enrichment is made available to students during regularly scheduled lunch periods. Every child is involved in the in-depth study of a Talent area. Talent teachers often have the students for two to three years where they establish strong relationships and excellent skill development. Our organizational structure, and the supportive environment that we engender, gives us the framework for success and our numerous awards and accolades demonstrate our success. Among our noteworthy achievements is our extraordinary success regarding acceptances to specialized high schools in the sciences and the arts. This year, 92 students accepted offers for LaGuardia High School for the Arts, 60 graduates were accepted to Stuyvesant High School and 74 to Brooklyn Technical High School and 42 to Staten Island Technical High School. Many others were accepted into other specialized schools such as Brooklyn Latin, Bronx High School of Science, High School of Math, Engineering at City. We attribute this success to our student body’s determination, our challenging curriculum, a dedicated staff and administration. In addition to our rigorous program, a large percentage of our graduates take the Integrated Algebra, Earth Science (in grade 7) and Living Environment Regents Exams. On average, the Regents scores are in the 90’s and the majority of our students leave middle school with at least 6 high school credits completed. In alignment with the Framework for Great Schools, Mark Twain cultivated strong family and community ties, and fostered numerous partnerships and collaborations with local elected officials, several organizations and institutions. The resources that come from a proactive Parents’ Association, a strong relationship with current Councilman, Mark Treyger and Borough President Eric Adams we have modernized Twain's facilities.  Our school library has undergone a major half million dollar physical renovation that also includes digitizing the entire collection, availability of a substantial set of EBooks for the entire student body to download, and participation in a system where NYC Library books can be borrowed from our facility and delivered.  Our largest talent, Computer Mathematics is housed in three separate well equipped labs. 0  Our most recent renovation was the creation of a realistic "courtroom" that is used for debates, mock trials, re-enactments and other specific events. We hope that the formal atmosphere of the courtroom will enhance the gravitas our students experience as they learn about civics, the law and history.  Many locations in the building including our auditorium, lunch room, computer labs, library and multiple classrooms are now air conditioned and there are plans to air condition a number of other locations.  Our newest computer lab features large screen iMacs, wired and wireless high speed connections, and 3D MakerBot Printer. And thanks to a nearly continuous stream of funding, we have interactive Smart Boards or in some cases, large flat screen TVs under wireless control, in nearly every instructional classroom in the building.  We are now a complete 1:1 Digital Device school where every student has access to an iPad iPads in multiple mobile carts and an iPad and computer in the hands of nearly every teacher in the building. Modeled after a similar program at Staten Island Technical, we have gone digital across all grades and content areas in terms of access and curriculum. We're also piloting a new mobile device deployment and management system for the DOE and Apple. Our is 239.schoolwires.com site and use of Skedula / Pupil Path provide access to every portion of the Twain community. It is an excellent resource for parents and students alike. You will find information pertaining to admissions, school events, our Parents' Association, school calendar and notable accomplishments. We are comparatively unique in NYC in that many faculty members generate content for this centralized site to use in conjunction with their classes. Our web site also enables us to share examples of the outstanding work and activities in which our students are engaged. This web site is our forum that serves to showcase the hard work of every member of our team. We also provide students with opportunities to learn from home with accounts for PearsonSuccessNet.com (online access to English, Math, Science, Social Studies and Foreign Language textbooks and other Common Core materials). We also make use of StudyIsland.com (a game-oriented test prep system for ELA and math that students access from home, school and their iPads), Streaming.DiscoveryEducation.com (1000,000 educationally appropriate videos from PBS and the Disccovery Network) and BrainPop.com (animated curricular content). Interactive digital programs like NearPod and Prezi are also used throughout the grades. Twain is also an affiliate school of The Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History. and the New York Historical Socity. The institute and NYHS offers resources of more than 60,000 primary source documents, multi-media series, student contests, and seminars for our staff to support making history come alive for our students. To meet the needs of all learners we are continuing our use of the Flipped Classroom to assist students with conceptual understandings. Students are able to view teacher created content based videos, at their own pace outside of the classroom, to clarify points of confusion by being able to re-examine parts of a lesson. We encourage our students to test their academic and creative prowess. Evidence of that success includes victories in a wide range of competitions such as the Math Team competition, the SIFMA Stock Market Game competition and others. Our senior yearbook has earned several consecutive first place finishes in the American Scholastic Press Association's national competition. Creative Writing students won multiple essay competitions including multiple Gold Keys in the Scholastic Writing Awards, the Water Conservation Poetry Contest, and the Holocaust Essay and Poetry Contest. Recently, the work of over a dozen Creative Writing students appeared in Teen Ink literary magazine. 1  Our supportive Parents Association and local politicians are busy raising funds for future upgrades. And most importantly, we achieve these results around the time and programming and financial commitments to our eleven talent programs. Our "Team" of students, teachers, administrators and parents just continues to make us proud year after year and decade after decade. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. One of Twain's goals, as a specialized middle school community, is that all of our students are ready for the rigors of high school. In order to be equitable when preparing all of our children to be college and career ready we need to pay special attention to those students we instruct with disabilities. Many of our students with disabilities require targeted assistance in literacy and numeracy, daily executive functioning and grade-level readiness. Mark Twain is an exemplary school for the Arts. In order to provide the richest experience for our students we need to continue creating partnerships and opportunities that enable our gifted and talented students to experience their education outside the walls of the traditional classroom. Our Music Talent students performed at prestigious venues such as Carnegie Hall, Brooklyn Borough Hall and Lincoln Center, but they also received some of the highest possible ratings in the annual New York State School Music Association Major Organization Festival. The Creative Writing department took several honors last year including spots nationwide in the Time for Kids Reporter Talent Search. Another student secured the Brooklyn spot for the Ezra Jack Keats Bookmaking Competition. We were also honored with over a dozen winners in Scholastic Writing Awards, and having over a dozen students published in Teen Ink, a literary magazine. Our Fine Arts and Media students secured Scholastic Gold and Silver Keys and honorable mentions. Several students were honored at the annual P.S. Art celebration in an exhibit at the Met. Other students brought home honors in the Brooklyn Borough Arts Festival. Twain students also collaborate on projects that involve the efforts of multiple talents. For instance, many different talents collaborate to produce our award-winning senior yearbook Reflections, our dance, drama, and musical performances, as well as our web site at is239.schoolwires.com. Such collaborative endeavors are worthwhile experiences for all involved. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2  In alignment with the Framework for Great Schools, Mark Twain cultivated Strong Family and Community Ties, and fostered numerous partnerships and collaborations with local elected officials, several organizations and institutions. We marry effective school leadership with upholding the honorable tradition of excellence, clearly making Mark Twain a distinctive middle school. Our continual improvement is anchored on these core instructional expectations: Instructional Focus- Student Engagement / Rigor / Technology   Knowledge of Students- Cluster / Talent Program  Collaborative Professional Learning - Cluster Conferences / Data / Department / Grade Leaders For the 2018-2019 year we will focus on Rigorous Instruction as we need to assist students with disabilities in closing the gap, (across the grade levels in both ELA and Math) and becoming more proficient. Our focus this year will be to facilitate student problem solving. The emphasis will involve:   setting high class expectations teaching students strategies and then use cues to remind the student to initiate the strategy (making use of modeling, think alouds, graphic organizers, visuals and hands-on application where applicable to scaffold the learning).  provide practice for the strategy both in and outside of class (use of tutoring and the flipped classroom, computer applications)  establish a climate of success- (emphasis on growth mindset and mastery learning)  where applicable, increase family involvement for support. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 21K239 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1322 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 20 21 46 54 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 20 14 25 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 38.0% % Attendance Rate 29.8% % Reduced Lunch 1.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.2% 5.7% 51.4% % Multi-Racial % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.09 0% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 93.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO YES N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO YES N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A NO N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 65 67 9 95.9% 7.9% 11.9% 6.9% 27.8% 8.2% 6 23% 6.3 89.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO YES YES N/A YES NO YES YES N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Rigorous Instruction: Twain's Strength Upon reviewing data from our NYC Progress Report and State Accountability Report, we have identified that overall, our students perform well. We spend time supporting instructional staff with regard to rigor. Through targeted professional learning, inquiry work, cluster and data team preparation we provide time and instructional support for teachers to create opportunities for students to engage in critical thinking and demonstrate understandings. Priority Need(s) Our school has made strides in ELA yearly in moving our self-contained students from a 1.96 in 2015 to 2.12 in 2018. In addition, our bottom third is performing better than our peers at other city schools. Looking forward we aim to get that number to a 3.0 . To address this gap we need to help these students reach proficiency. We will continue to support self-contained and ICT students so that they too may engage in critical thinking as well as deepening their understanding of content. Recognizing that a "one-size-fits-all" approach does not address the specific needs of struggling readers, we will be using different reading strategies and changing our delivery of instruction (how we help students reach mastery) so that all students may succeed despite their specific deficiencies. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Rigorous Instruction 5  By June 2019, 10% of those students, in grades, 6,7 and 8 who are reading below a 6th grade reading level will correctly answer a minimum of 70% of ELA questions correctly as evidenced on the Spring 2019 Reading Performance Series. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ICT teachers are working within two content areas (Math/Sci or English/Social Studies) and two clusters. This will enable teachers to spend more time focusing on literacy strategies, pertinent to their respective content areas, so that they can support/scaffold student literacy and learning. Teachers incorporate the UDL framework, engaging in backward planning and revising units of study so they incorporate technology, engage in student goal setting/self-reflection and scaffolding instruction so ALL students have a path to the NYS NGLS All ICT and Special Ed teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration All teachers/ Admin Sept 2018 All teachers/ Administration Late January 2019 and June 2019 Teachers determine the zone of proximal development for each child not making progress to determine where the child is in relation to where they should be. They will set incremental instructional goals, with the students and assess their progress regularly. Special Ed teachers and self-contained students Sept 2018- All teachers/ October 2018 Administration Teachers start shifting to competency-based education. Students will receive differentiated support based on the individuals' learning needs as they work toward mastery. All teachers October 2018-May 2019 All teachers/Administration RIS Teachers continue incorporating multiple strategies into their units and practices that will extend student thinking and foster grit. All teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 All teachers/ Administration Use of Pearson Successmaker as a prescriptive and intervention program for math and reading. For each student there are individual learner paths which guide students to targeted performance goals. A reporting tool allows the Special Ed Teachers and self-contained students September 2018- Special Ed ELA and Math teachers June 2019 7  teacher to intervene when students need additional assistance. Teachers will use assistive technology- Pearson audio texts for our visually impaired/dyslexic students to promote reading skill development by listening to text books on audio All Special Ed/ICT Sept 2018-June 2019 Special Ed Teachers Select ICT Teachers Teachers, Support Staff 8th grade students will continue to receive a double period of instruction in ELA weekly. Special Education students Sept 2018-June 2019 ICT students continue to have dedicated teacher support in the form of small group instruction and scaffolded activities. ICT students Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration Support Staff SP. Ed./ELA teachers Administration ICT teachers Administration Use of ReadWorks to expose students to research-based reading instruction that uses both non-fiction and literary articles that encourage annotating, vocabulary development, reading comprehension through the use of text as well as audio versions of the articles. Select teachers of students reading below grade level Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration Use of technology, specifically iPad applications, that target reading comprehension strategies in all grades All students Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration Lunch time tutoring periods continue across all subjects All students Sept 2018-June 2019 After school classes are available to all students to improve skills and test taking strategies. Once again, students in the lowest third will be appropriately grouped and instruction will be adjusted for their needs. All students Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration All teachers Select teachers Administration On-line resource access to Study Island and Discovery, both are designed to assess student-levels and provide scaffolded questions and activities to improve core skills. All students Sept 2018-June 2019 All teachers Administration Teachers (in grade level teams) use the data from assessments to adjust and differentiate instruction continuously and provide scaffolding so that all students have the same path to the standard. All teachers October All teachers 2018- June 2019 Administration Teacher inquiry teams are focusing on problems of practice, engaging in instructional rounds, utilizing Habits of Success All teachers November 2018-June 2019 All teachers Administration 8  and looking at data to revise units, and re-align curriculum maps as necessary. Ongoing professional learning, facilitated by the Administration, will focus on helping staff foster strategic and extended thinking (levels 3 & 4 DOK) strategies, incorporating elements of UDL (particularly around engagement and metacognition), on providing actionable feedback as a springboard to improvement, and changing mindset/ fostering grit. All teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration Teachers and paraprofessionals will attend appropriate special education professional learning sessions, particularly in Literacy and AIS work sessions facilitated by the DOE. Time will then be designated for their learning to then be shared with all appropriate stakeholders for adjustments to planning and instruction. Special Ed and ICT teachers, Admin and paras October 2018-June 2019 - where appropriate Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will share with parents executive functioning strategies, passwords for any appropriate online programs we are using, information on flipped classrooms, and notes/attachments in Twain239.net and Skedula about further support they can provide at home. Pertinent information will also be shared with parents in cluster conferences to keep parents apprised of what support they can provide their children at home. Where applicable, we will "backpack" information as well. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Our cluster system provides for an extremely supportive, personalized environment. Students are grouped into clusters of 150 students and share the same four core teachers. These teachers meet with parents, and students, and meet as an inter-disciplinary team, and across the grades. 2. Teachers’ meet regularly and engage in professsional learning, data analysis and planning for both grade level and across grade levels. 3. Purchasing of new/broken iPads and aps, site licenses for instructional websites (to increase ratio of devices to students and instructional support) 9  4. Core Teachers 5. Teacher Leaders 6. Administration 7. Outside Professional Development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. *By late January 2019, 10% those students who are reading below grade level in grades 6, 7 and 8 will demonstrate that they are approaching grade level, (or are on grade level) as evidenced in a mid-year reading benchmark assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 1. Teachers will administer early fall 2018 testing using Performance Series to assess starting points and create benchmarks. We will then evaluate students again in mid spring using the Performance Series. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Twain's Strength: For the past three years, as a faculty and community, we delved into helping students recognize their own role in their success by incorporating growth mindset techniques into the disciplines. We did this through targeted teacher-driven professional learning (lesson study, instructional rounds, sharing of best practices). We also engaged in several whole community study groups where we examined provocative and timely titles whose content propelled us to move our Twain students toward being college and career ready. Twain's Priority Need: We recognize the need that some students need more time and support so that they can work toward the mastery of a concept. The more traditional learning method of taking a test and moving on to the next topic may not be the best indicator of students' deep conceptualization of a topic. In 2018-2019 we will be piloting mastery learning which will focus on providing students who need more support, another avenue with which they too can reach proficiency. As part of our mastery learning select teachers will be using the flipped classroom to assist students with troubling concepts with which they need deeper instruction that they can review at their own pace. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Supportive Environment: Twenty percent of students struggling in Math in grades 6 and 7 will demonstrate a five point increase in their class averages on their progress and report cards between the fall and spring terms. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? As part of learning competency-based education staff will engage in research, professional learning, visiting exemplary school sites and then planning so they they can design experiences that enable students to demonstrate their mastery. All instructional staff Nov 2018-March 2019 Administration RIS Use professional learning and data time to plan for/and monitor (through instructional rounds), the creation of healthy classrooms that take into account emotional intelligence Teachers paras We will continue with the use of the flipped classroom, (specifically in our ICT classes) as a strategy that enables students who need extra assistance to be able to go back and review/relearn material as needed. Teachers Teachers will review different types of formative assessments to leverage in the moment student learning. Teachers Where applicable, staff will utilize reciprocal teaching opportunities where students will work in small groups in which one student "teaches" others. Teachers and Students Sharing of information with families about how the development of the whole child, in addition to the academic part of education, is important to ensuring that students are able to prosper. parents Fo the staff and parents of Twain students, a voluntary book group and select faculty conference sessions will focus on Most Likely to Succeed (Tony Wagner and Ted Dintersmith). The text supports teachers concentration on creative problem-solving and finding joy in learning. admin teachers paras parents November 2018- April 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 December 2018-June 2019 Sept 2018-June 2019 December 2018- June 2019 Administration RIS Teachers Teachers Administration Instructional Coach Teachers Administration Parent Coordinator Guidance Admin RIS Teachers 2  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will provide print information, work shops and information disseminated through cluster conferences and parent teacher conferences about emotional intelligence. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Teacher leaders modeling/sharing best practices 2. Administration sharing of resources and coordinating professional learning and planning 3. Texts, articles for collaborative book group 4. Outside professional development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2018, all staff will respond to a survey determining how addressing social-emotional behaviors has attributed to success with learning activities, behavior and mindset. We are looking for an 10% increase in student grades from the start of the year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Eighty percent of students engaging in mastery learning will demonstrate proficiency by improving in 5-10 points on their mid-year content based assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Twain's Strengths The key to the success of our school is collaboration. Our school, from its inception, is uniquely programmed into inter-disciplinary “Clusters” that are aligned with our academic, visual and performing art “Talents.” The teachers engage in weekly cluster conferences and data and planning periods. Cluster conference periods are dual purposed. Part of the time is spent so that the core teachers can work and plan interdisciplinary units, case conference and strategize for individuals and groups of students. The clusters also arrange meetings with parents and other teachers and support staff to help apprise stakeholders of developments, and foster social and emotional growth and development- all of which is key to student achievement. “Data and Planning Periods” are vertical teams comprised of content teachers from each grade level. The teacher teams work collaboratively to do the following:  Create scaffolded and aligned curriculum so that there is open and consistent communication with teachers of surrounding grades within a content area.  Design pre-assessments (formative) and post-assessments (summative) that guide instruction  Develop grading rubrics that clearly articulate student work expectations  Analyze data and student work  Collectively review the Common Core Learning Standards and re-align curriculum maps  Address scaffolding needs within units so ALL students have a pathway to learn  Create student-centered performance tasks in alignment with standards  Analyze performance task outcomes  Continuously utilize data to improve the learning process for all learners Twain's Priority Need Recognizing that students need to be college and career ready, our 4th year of inquiry needs to shift its focus to one of the three tenets discussed in this year's book group about what teachers can do in the classroom to help students develop their 21st century skills.  Reviewing assessments on how memorization-intensive they are and adjusting them so that they are  demonstrations of students critical thinking skills Shifting classroom lecturing to giving students the opportunity to work in teams teaching and learning to and with each other.  Creating opportunities for project-based learning and the disseminating of findings to a broader audience for a real-world impact Science inquiry teams will focus on project based learning and will work together to improve instruction for ALL students by scaffolding instruction. Teachers will participate in targeted professional learning to support their 4  nuanced discussions about how to determine specific learning targets, skills and sub-skills, to foster improvement for those students examined. Teachers will use feedback, (grows and glows), to assist in improving student performance. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Collaborative Teachers By June of 2019, 8th grade science students engaging in hands-on authentic learning projects will see a 1% increase on the Living Environment Regents scores over last year's 2018 8th grade class. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Assistant Principals and the school coach will attend central, district and outside professional development sessions in alignment with the goals of the school. Learnings and instruction will be shared with all stakeholders through small group meetings, on-on-one conferencing, and at times larger-scale professional learning sessions. As part of the inquiry process all involved inquiry team members will... engage in: appropriate professional learning both on and off site   begin to explore texts/ideas about how to best address the specific needs of students Administrators Sept 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals Instructional Coach Instructional Coach Teachers Paraprofessionals All Teachers October 2018-June 2019 Administration All Teachers Administration Teacher Leader Administration Model Teachers Lead teachers will participate in on-going research and professional development to increase their skills to facilitate inter-visitation and model lessons. Model Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Lead teachers will facilitate professional learning within their respective departments with a specific emphasis on embedding 21st century skills into the curriculum. Teachers will participate in collegial instructional rounds/lesson study as part of the inquiry process to gauge incremental progress and next steps. Model Teachers All Teachers October 2018-June 2019 February All Teachers 2019-May 2019 Teachers will continue using their inter-visitation findings to evaluate and revise instructional strategies for inquiry and unit plans as necessary. All February Administration Teachers 2019-May 2019 All teachers All appropriate teachers will amend current unit plans to focus on specific strategies, with regard to 21st century skills. All teachers April 2019-June 2019 Administration 6 Maintain the school website, Twain239.net to apprise parents of important initiatives, instructional resources, dates of cluster conferences. Parents All Teachers Administration Sept 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be encouraged to attend cluster conferences, open houses and special events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Giving teachers release time to briefly visit the model classroom of a teacher to examine strategies Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, 70% of those science students engaging in project based learning will have three pieces of evidence to share: teacher/student conferecing notes, student feedback, and a plan of "next steps" in their working portfolios. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Qualitative data: Low inference notes as evidence / talking points of the classroom visit   Collaborative notes on "next steps" for instructional changes after the classroom visit Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Effective School Leadership: Twain's Strengths As a staff we consider ourselves life-long learners and take pride in our recognition that good, teaching is both a science and an art. We see teaching not just as a profession, but as a vocation. We are contemplative, and dedicated to helping all of our students succeed. In being attuned to the pulse of how students learn best, we recognize that school initiatives take time to take root, need modeling, and many levels of support. We engage in whole staff study groups focusing on cutting edge discussions on effective instruction. Priority Needs: Last year we read Tony Wagner's Most Likely to Succeed, and started to consider what preparing our students for college and career readiness should look like at each grade level and across the disciplines. We also recognize that in order to prepare our students for the rigors of adulthood, that we would need to rethink outdated teaching models. Going forward we have several important considerations:.  Our ICT teachers need to have multiple pathways to reach the needs of our ICT students.  A one-and-done assessment approach does not help students as they are working toward proficiency- especially in areas that students find vexing. We endeavor to engage in the tenets of Mastery Learning.  We also recognize that we teach the whole child, and that embedding 21st Century Skills and Habits of Success into the way we instruct our students will aid them in being high- school ready and eventually productive members of society. Our leadership will be trail blazers this year by looking at the school's most pressing needs, gathering information, and engaging in training so that we can facilitate the changes that are necessary to meet the needs of our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 8  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Effective School Leadership Goal: By June 2019, all students in all ELA classes will have been exposed to Habits of Success. Eighty-five percent of ELA students in grades 6, 7 and 8 will indicate, in survey form, on a scale of 1-4, the level of impact that our direct teaching of habits of success had on them. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Key personnel engage in ongoing training/professional learning in the following areas: Admin Sept 2018- Admin, Coach, Lead Teachers ICT   Mastery Learning  Habits of Success  21st Century Skills Coach June 2019 Teachers Paras Continuation of the whole faculty study group on relevant professional titles. Admin Dec 2018- Coach June 2019 Admin, Coach, Lead Teachers Using the observation process, based upon the Danielson Framework, will afford administrators the ability to provide meaningful feedback focusing specifically on Danielson’s Domain 3 – focusing on 3c- engagement Administration will use part of faculty conference time to highlight and share best 21st century practices, Habits of Success, ICT good practices, mastery learning Teachers Paras Admin Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration Teachers Select Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration Lead Teachers will share (Danielson 3c) best practices on creating well-designed learning tasks and activities that require scaffolded, high-level student thinking and emphasis depth over breadth Teacher Leaders and teachers November 2018-June 2019 Administration Teacher Leaders Lead Teachers will share (Danielson 3d) best practices on how to question for understanding, provide feedback, and having students assess their own work against established criteria. Teacher Leaders and teachers November 2018-June 2019 Administration Teacher Leaders 0 Use planning team meeting time to examine lessons and rework questions so that questions are designed to explore real-life scenarios or problems that are relevant. Use co-planning and departmental team meeting time to plan for looking at student work and how to provide effective feedback so that students can begin to learn how to process/assess their own work. Teachers Grade Leaders Teachers October 2018-June 2019 Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration Grade Leaders RIS Administration Teacher Leaders Consciously teach/model metacognitive practices to students and then encourage them to critique and use revise their own learning against standards. Update parents on pupil path, at cluster conferences and in parent newsletter of the initiatives that come out of inquiry and school-wide study groups and encourage them to reinforce metacognitive efforts at home. Teachers Teachers Use inquiry cycles as another opportunity to monitor student progress and make necessary changes in instruction and support. Teachers Continue using instructional rounds to examine the use of "teachable moments" and feedback when making mid-lesson adjustments, Teachers Instructional staff revisit their units in grade level content area teams to rework their lesson objectives into kid-friendly learning objectives that will include: Teachers  what will stand as evidence of student understanding  how they will monitor student understanding  what questions will be asked that deepen student understanding. Sept 2018-June 2019 Sept 2018-June 2019 October 2018-June 2019 January 2019-June 2019 Sept 2018-June 2019 RIS Administration Teachers Administration Teachers Administration Teachers Administration Teachers Administration Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. By January 2019, the school (administration, RIS, teachers, parent coordinator) will begin sharing scaffolded rubrics, learning objectives and metacognitive approaches with parents so they can support the learning at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Sustained professional learning for all stakeholders   Administration  RIS 1   Teacher Leaders Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the end of January in 2019, ELA teachers will survey students asking which of the five habits of success students recognize. Students will be able to recognize and articulate the impact of 4 of the 5 indicators of habits of success. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. student responses on sliding scales Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Twain's strengths: Part of Twain's commitment to our students has us creating partnerships with outside organizations that assist with making learning come alive for our students. In addition to our other partnerships we are hoping for 2018-2019 to create partnerships with the NY Historical Society. We are also working on becoming an Apple Distinguished School. Priority Needs: At Twain we endeavor to teach the whole student. We are collaborating with Elevate New York in order to "elevate" character qualities and life skills into our curriculum to develop character and capabilities needed for our students to succeed academically and socially. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Strong Family and Community Ties By June 2019, we will raise the report card grades by 5% of those 7th and 8th grade students whose attendance is closely monitored through targeted outreach. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Partner with Elevate New York to assist students increase school attendance and improve academic test scores. Students Sept 2018- Admin Update parents on pupil path, at cluster conferences and in parent newsletter of the initiatives that come out of inquiry and school-wide study groups and encourage them to reinforce metacognitive efforts at home. Providing regularly updated information about activities in the subject areas as well as homework and upcoming assignments, curriculum outlines, and other related information communicated via our school website, written notices sent home with the students. Easy accessibility to this information enables parents to better support their children’s academic progress from home. Use of the flipped classroom and blogs that can be viewed by both students and their parents as they complete homework and course work at home. Parents are invited to attend cluster conferences in which administrators, cluster teachers, parents, and students meet to discuss individual academic and social progress. During these meetings, minutes are kept detailing strategies to be used both at school and at home to best support student success. Follow up meetings will reveal student progress and provide opportunities to revisit recommendations and revise those support strategies as needed. Encourage more parents to participate effectively as full partners in their children’s education by utilizing, orientations, parent workshops, School Leadership Team meetings, Parents’ Association meetings, and other school committees/events. Fostering communication in the home-school connection by utilizing the I.S. 239 website Teachers June 2019 Parent Coordinator All parents Sept 2018- Admin June 2019 Teachers All parents Sept 2018- All staff Parent Coordinator June 2019 All parents Sept 2018- All instructional staff June 2019 All parents Sept 2018- All staff June 2019 All parents Sept 2018- Administration June 2019 All parents Sept 2018- All staff Continued support of our Parent Coordinator in her efforts to promote increased parent involvement in school affairs Parent Coordinator June 2019 Sept 2018- Administration June 2019 4 Continued use of online grading system “Skedula/PupilPath” which provides live information about student progress and All parents Sept 2018- All staff June 2019 anecdotal information with parents and members of the school community. Use of Global Connect Messenger system to keep parents informed. All parents Sept 2018- Administration Parents will receive graded rubrics for each task and assessment as well as some metacognitive activities to use with their children upon completion of assignments/projects. Share titles of schoolwide reading (TBA) with parents and other stakeholders to create a community. We will provide information and links to NYSED and ENGAGENY via the school website. Continue with exclusive high school visits . Continue to invite former alum and successful professionals across all talents to speak to students . June 2019 All parents Sept 2018- All staff June 2019 All parents Dec 2018- All Staff June 2019 All parents Sept 2018- All staff June 2019 Sept 2018- Administration Interested Students June 2019 All parents Sept 2018- Administration June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Elevate New York Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. All staff PA Grants to support programs Community and Alumni Support. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 5  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By early spring 2019, progress reports will indicate that 80% (of those 7th and 8th grade students whose attendance is closely monitored) will have raised their fall report card grades by 5%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. report cards, teacher reports, parent surveys, discussions with parents at cluster conferences and parent teacher conferences Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ● Summative assessments ● Formative assessments ● Teacher recommendation Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ● Study /Reading skills program ● ELA tutoring ● ELA prep classes for the SHSAT ● ELA skills program ● Parental input ● Summative assessments ● Math skills program Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● Full class ● One-to-one ● Small group ● Small group ● Two periods per week during the school day ● One period per week during the school day ● One period per week during the school day ● Two hours per week after school ● One period per week during the school day ● Math tutoring ● One-to-one/small group ● One period per week during the school day ● One period per week during the school day ● Two hours per week after school ● Two hours per week after school ● Formative assessments ● Math preparation classes for the SHSAT ● Full class ● Teacher recommendation ● Math skills program ● Parental input ● Regents preparation classes ● Small group ● Small group 7  Science Social Studies ● Summative assessments ● Formative assessments ● Teacher recommendation ● Parental input ● Summative assessments ● Science tutoring ● Regents preparation classes ● One-to-one/small group ● Small group ● One period per week during the school day ● Two hours per week after school ● Social Studies tutoring ● One-to-one/small group ● One period per week during the school day ● Formative assessments ● Teacher recommendation ● Parental input ● Teacher At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) ● Counseling ● One-to-one/small group ● During the school day recommendation ● Talk sessions ● Parental input ● Cluster-parent conferences ● Small group ● Small group ● SBST evaluations ● One-to-one ● During the school day ● During the school day ● During the school day 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. n/a Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 0 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 1  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local N/A 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 3  4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Mark Twain Intermediate School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Mark Twain Intermediate School will support parents and families of Title I students by: 5  ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 6  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Mark Twain Intermediate School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 7  Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 8  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; 9  ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 21 School Name Mark Twain IS 239 Borough Brooklyn School Number 239 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Karen Ditolla Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Caitlin Pardington Teacher/Subject Area Helen Nier-Russo/Special Ed Teacher/Subject Area June Gevertzman/ELA Related-Service Provider Michele Buls Superintendent Isabel DiMola Assistant Principal Christine Sciascia Coach type here School Counselor Delgermaa Ganbaatar Parent Christina Johnson Parent Coordinator Neslyn LeBrun Field Support Center Staff Member Ronnie Rodriguez Other (Name and Title) Patricia Vento/Test Coord C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 1  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1332 Total number of ELLs 10 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.75% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Because we have such a small population of ELLs, teachers assess each student individually to guide instructional planning. Teachers utilize teacher created assessments, interviews, projects, homework assignments, classwork and the like to guide instructional planning. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our school utilizes weekly Cluster Conferences in which all of the core course teachers meet together to discuss student progress and plan instruction as well as after school sessions to support this effort. 2  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Teachers utilize school developed Performance Tasks, Scantron Performance Series data, and NYS exam results to identify baseline, progress, and areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Our school utilizes weekly Cluster Conferences in which all of the core course teachers meet together to discuss student progress and plan instruction. Parents and students are often invited to these conferences, as well as after school Parent Engagement sessions, to address interventions and promote student success. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We utilize NYSESLAT, NYS ELA and Math results, as well as school based assessments, Performance Tasks, and Scantron Performance Series data to evaluate and inform our ELL instruction. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Weekly Cluster Conferences, Monthly Faculty and Department meetings, and after school Professional Development and Parent Engagement sessions are structures currently in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to our programs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Small group instruction in English is delivered by means of a pull-out freestanding ENL program along with integrated ENL instruction. The ENL teacher worsk in close collaboration with the ELA, math, and content area teachers and provides push-in support whenever possible. Students are grouped heterogeneously. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Entering/Emerging level students receive ENL instruction eight periods per week for a total of 360 minutes (up to half of that time may be Integrated ENL) while Transitioning/Expanding level students receive ENL instruction four periods per week for a total of 180 minutes (up to half of that time may be Integrated ENL). Commanding level students receive two 3  periods of Integrated ENL instruction for two years after achieving this level. All ELL students receive six periods of ELA instruction per week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All ELL students receive six periods of ELA instruction per week. Additionally, content area teachers provide instruction in math, science, and social studies. All instruction is provided in English. The ENL teacher works in close collaboration with the ELA, math, and content area teachers and provide push-in support whenever possible. Appropriate ENL strategies, dictionaries, glossaries, use of technological resources, and peer tutoring are employed in this program. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? All instruction is provided in English; the native language is not utilized or evaluated. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status One strength of having such a small ELL population is that it enables us to provide instruction in a highly individualized manner. Students receive instruction with, at most, 5 students. As such, instruction is highly differentiated on an individual basis. Rather than building a program to serve the needs of SIFE students or based upon the years of ENL service received, our program is based on each student’s individual strengths and weaknesses. We take into account individual needs, academic ability, requirements from his/her IEP, learning disabilities, emotional issues, etc., and instruction is differentiated accordingly. Former ELLs receive testing accommodations for all exams and Integrated ENL services for two years after achieving proficiency. Additionally, these students are encouraged to attend tutoring once per week with their content area teachers for additional support. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Despite recent budget cuts, we have been able to acquire a variety of instructional materials to support ELLs. Materials are assigned to students according to their individual needs and abilities, not based on their inclusion in a particular subgroup. Teachers make these decisions on a case by case basis. We have subscribed to Study Island, an online provider of instructional materials for various subjects that students may access at school or home. Teachers assign appropriate activities in the Study Island system based on the students’ strengths and weaknesses. They are then able to monitor student progress and choose subsequent assignments to support growth and understanding. Likewise, this data helps to inform instructional decisions in the classroom. We also subscribe to edHelper.com, another online system that provides instructional materials on a wide variety of levels in different subject areas that can be used to meet the needs of all students. Picture dictionaries and dictionaries in various languages are also available. Other resources we utilize include two Scholastic magazines, Read XL and Action. These magazines are assigned based upon student reading and language ability. They include high interest materials on different levels. Similarly, we use a host of books and other reading material with lower level vocabulary and high interest topics that correspond to the students’ ages and grade levels. In this way, we are able to meet the academic and language needs of the students while honoring their ages and interests so that instruction is both meaningful and appropriate. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Again, one strength of having such a small ELL population is that it enables us to provide instruction in a highly individualized manner. Our Special Education department works closely with the ENL teacher to evaluate individual needs, academic ability, requirements from his/her IEP, learning disabilities, emotional issues, etc., and instruction is differentiated accordingly. 4  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. A variety of targeted intervention programs are provided for ELLs before, during, and after the school day. An extra period of ELA instruction with the ELA teacher each week is included in the program. Tutoring is offered on a weekly basis with each of the individual content area teachers and further supported by peer tutoring. All ELL students are encouraged to attend after-school literacy and math skills programs twice per week. Other intervention services are provided by the School Based Support Team and Guidance Counselor as warranted. Also, related services are provided as indicated by the students’ IEPs, if applicable. All services are provided in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Due to recent budget cuts, no new programs are slated to begin. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELL students are encouraged to participate in the extra-curricular activities offered at school. Not only are they invited to attend academic activities such as the math and literacy skills programs and field trips, they are also welcome to join clubs like the Robotics Team and Chess Club, athletic programs such as the CHAMPS program, drama/media programs such as our NIA program, and attend school events such as dances and school performances. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Despite recent budget cuts, we have been able to acquire a variety of instructional materials to support ELLs. Materials are assigned to students according to their individual needs and abilities, not based on their inclusion in a particular subgroup. Teachers make these decisions on a case by case basis. We have subscribed to Study Island, an online provider of instructional materials for various subjects that students may access at school or home. Teachers assign appropriate activities in the Study Island system based on the students’ strengths and weaknesses. They are then able to monitor student progress and choose subsequent assignments to support growth and understanding. Likewise, this data helps to inform instructional decisions in the classroom. We also subscribe to edHelper.com, another online system that provides instructional materials on a wide variety of levels in different subject areas that can be used to meet the needs of all students. Picture dictionaries and dictionaries in various languages are also available. Other resources we utilize include two Scholastic magazines, Read XL and Action. These magazines are assigned based upon student reading and language ability. They include high interest materials on different levels. Similarly, we use a host of books and other reading material with lower level vocabulary and high interest topics that correspond to the students’ ages and grade levels. In this way, we are able to meet the academic and language needs of the students while honoring their ages and interests so that instruction is both meaningful and appropriate. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? All instruction is provided in English; the home language is not utilized. With such a small program, students do not all share the same home language in the ENL class. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Again, our small ELL population allows us to deliver instruction in a highly individualized way. Some students receive instruction with as few as 1-2 students. At most, a class services approximately 5 students at a time. As such, instruction is highly differentiated on an individual basis. Rather than building a program to serve the needs of students based upon ages and grade levels, our program is based on each student’s individual strengths and weaknesses. We take into account individual needs, academic ability, requirements from his/her IEP, learning disabilities, emotional issues, etc., and instruction is differentiated accordingly. 5  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Prior to the beginning of the school year, newly enrolled ELL students are invited to an orientation in which the students meet the administrators, the Parent Coordinator, guidance counselor, some of their new teachers, and fellow students. They are taken on a tour of the school, attend a presentation about the school, and are given an opportunity to ask questions. They also receive a welcome packet containing detailed information about the school. Because new entrants are selected for our school through the District 21 Magnet Talent Testing Program, students are unable to transfer in mid-year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? As our school is a middle school, electives are not made available to students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development for all teachers of ELLs is provided at a variety of times during the school year. Topics such as data analysis and interpretation, differentiated instruction, Common Core Learning Standards, and lesson planning are covered in department and faculty meetings, cluster conferences, Monday afternoon Professional Development meetings, as well as at the Election Day and the Chancellor’s Conference Day professional development programs. In addition, the ENL teacher attends professional development offered by OELL and our Network and subsequently turn-keys the training at conferences. We are also currently working with our Network Leader and the other Network Schools to plan appropriate workshops and seminars to meet this requirement. Professional Development regarding supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards is addressed in more detail in department conferences as it is highly subject specific. However, this also occurs in small groups during break out sessions at the larger scale Election Day and Chancellor's Conference Day professional development day events. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The professional development hours required are provided during department and faculty meetings, cluster conferences, Monday afternoon Professional Development meetings, as well as at the Election Day and the Chancellor’s Conference Day professional development programs. In addition, the ENL teacher attends professional development offered by OELL and our Network and subsequently turn-keys the training at conferences. Agendas and attendance records are kept on file in the principal's office. 6  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In our school, cluster conferences are scheduled to discuss individual progress. Early in the academic year, the cluster coordinator invites the parent of ELL students to a cluster conference with the core course teachers, assistant principal, and ENL teacher to discuss progress, assessment results, and language needs. Parents or the school may request follow-up meetings at any time during the school year. School staff or parent volunteers serve as translators when necessary. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents, including parents of ELLs, are invited to participate in our active Parents’ Association and our School Leadership Team. Both groups hold meetings on a monthly basis. Members of the PA are in the school building on a regular basis for a variety of reasons. In fact, we have a designated room in the school where the parents can meet for workshops and to plan, organize, and work on projects. Our PA coordinates several fundraisers over the course of the year in order to support and enhance our educational endeavors. Members of the PA are always enthusiastic volunteers at school events such as performances and trips and are often seen assisting in different capacities during the school day. Similarly, they prepare a welcome packet for the parents of incoming students and make a presentation at the aforementioned orientation before school begins. Not only do PA members manage the Parents’ Association section of our school website, they also sponsor weekly sales during the students’ lunch periods for treats, school spirit merchandise, and even school supplies. Moreover, they assist in planning special events for the children such as laser light shows and movie nights. Parent volunteers and staff members provide translation services as needed. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 7 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Karen Ditolla, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 8  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Mark Twain IS 239 School DBN: 21K239 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Karen Ditolla Title Principal Christine Sciascia Assistant Principal Neslyn LeBrun Parent Coordinator Caitlin Pardington ENL/Bilingual Teacher Christina Johnson Parent Helen Nier-Russo/Sp. Ed. Michele Buls/Related Services Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Delgermaa Ganbataar School Counselor Isabel DiMola Ronnie Rodriguez Patricia Vento/Test Coord. Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 21K239 School Name: Mark Twain IS 239 Superintendent: Isabel DiMola The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Delgermaa Ganbaatar Guidance Counselor Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. New entrants must complete the Home Language Identification Survey on which parents indicate their language preference. Parents are also asked to indicate language preference on the Student Emergency Contact cards which are reviewed in September. A review of lunch forms also indicates when families request a language other than English. The Parent Coordinator, guidance counselor and office staff also keep a record of requests for translated documents or oral interpretation services. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 0  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Chinese Russian Bengali 1395 216 116 16 78.2 12.11 6.5 0.9 1361 188 121 19 76.29 10.54 6.78 1.07 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English and Chinese Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Notification of student academic progress 11/17; 1/18; 3/18; 6?18 Notification of Parent Teacher Conferences 9/17; 11/17; 3/18 Notification of Parents' Association meetings Monthly Invitations to attend Cluster Conferences Ongoing Mark Twain staff and/or parent volunteers will provide written translation services. Mark Twain staff and/or parent volunteers will provide written translation services. Mark Twain staff and/or parent volunteers will provide written translation services. Mark Twain staff and/or parent volunteers will provide written translation services. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences 9/17; 11/17; 3/18 interpretation service(s)? Mark Twain staff and/or parent volunteers will provide translation services. 1  Cluster Conferences Ongoing Parents' Association meetings Monthly Open Houses Orientation October June HS Information Workshops September & October Mark Twain staff and/or parent volunteers will provide translation services. Mark Twain staff and/or parent volunteers will provide translation services. Mark Twain staff and/or parent volunteers will provide translation services. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We would enact the translation services unit to send voice messages, emails, and texts. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. This information is distributed in the opening day package and is available on-line. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Welcome Poster is displayed at the entrance of the school. All other required documents are made available to families who are in need of language assistance. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Feedback from parents will be gathered through our website, parent survey, requests made to our Parent Coordinator and guidance counselors, as well as our administrative team and office staff. 2  3 
