 22K251 School Name: P.S. 251 PAERDEGAT Principal: SHELDON NOEL   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Paerdegat 332200010251 PreK-5 School Number (DBN): 22K251 1037 East 54 th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11234 718-251-4110 718-241-3200 Phone Number: Fax: Sheldon Noel Snoel@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 22 Email Address: Sheldon Noel Gladys Avila Colleen Thomas Juan Alleyne CharmaineLe NA NA N/A District Information Julia Bove Superintendent: 5619 Flatlands Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11234 Superintendent’s Office Address: Jbove@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-968-6117 Phone Number: 718-968-6252 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   602N22K251 FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: MauricereDiGovia Executive Director: 415 89th Street Brooklyn, NY 11209 mdigovi@schools.nyc.gov. Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-968-6248 Phone Number: 718-968-6252 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) SheldonNoel DennisMicklin Colleen Thomas SandlerJacinthe ColleenThomas NA NA NA CharmaineLe Juan Alleyne *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Community Based OrganizationRepresentative, if applicable Parent Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) SimoneCampbell MichelleThomas ElsaMitchell Violet Hannay Parent Parent Parent Staff Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to celebrate diversity and overcome challenges by setting high expectations through multi-faceted instruction and positive relationships that promotes success for all.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 251K is a School Wide Project, Pre-K – 5th grade school with a student enrollment of 521 students set in the Flatlands section of Brooklyn. The work of the classroom teachers and paraprofessionals is enhanced by the content specialists’ programs which include health/physical education, computer, science, music, dance and art. Other support staff includes a 50/50 (intervention/IEP) service provider, psychologist, social worker, guidance counselor, a staff developer, speech, OT, PT and ENL teacher. Classroom teachers provide instruction in the core curricula of literacy via Journeys, mathematics via Go Math, science, Social Studies, as well as music and art, physical and health education, drama and dance. The New York State exams for ELA and math, the NYSESLAT as well as ongoing Fountas & Pinnell benchmarking and running records keep staff informed of student progress. Extended days are Mondays from 2:20-3:40 PM for professional learning and Tuesdays from 2:20-3:35 PM for parent outreach. There is a professional learning team comprised of the principal and key staff members that sets the instructional course for the school based upon the citywide instructional expectations. The Vertical Team meets to share and compare initiatives across grades and to analyze teaching and learning trends of our school at large. Our paraprofessionals are involved in all professional learning opportunities. Professional development is provided in-house via our staff and members of the school development committee and opportunities outside our school. Additionally, several teachers host inter-visitations on specific areas such as questioning, accountable talk and classroom management. Teachers and paraprofessionals are encouraged to grow and develop professionally seeking out any and all opportunities for such growth. Our Apple computer lab and New Visions library teach children to master the use of laptops, iPads, desktops, Smart Boards, as well as software that connects to the Internet. The structured science program by Amplify, features manipulatives, live specimens, as well as other necessary materials to perform experiments. The science program provides instruction related to the 4 th grade New York State exam in science. In the music program the children play keyboards and follow the instructions from the Music and the Brain organization. Art instruction is aligned to the New York City Department of Education’s Blue Print for the Arts. The Fitness Gram is the curriculum used by the physical education teacher. Special programs and connections with community-based organizations (CBOs) include: Substance Abuse Prevention and Intervention Specialist (SAPIS)   Brooklyn Ballet  Common Cents-Penny Harvest  OST after-school with Millennium Development We strive to extend parent involvement on the Parent Teachers Association and School Leadership Team, as Learning Leaders and participants in evening English Language Learners and General Education Diploma classes, continually seeking their input in academic decisions and initiatives that affect their children’s success and performance. Tuesday afternoon extended day meetings prior to any major test as well as end of year showcases and festivals usually will bring in the community. Having said that, parent involvement is still an area of challenge for our school. Awards are given at every Parent Teachers Association meeting in the hopes that more parents and relatives will attend. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. At P.S 251, we have a diverse population of learners. Our students with disabilities are serviced in various classroom settings(General Education, ICT, 12:1:1) to meet their academic needs. The Special Educators make modifications and differentiate within the curriculum and include multiple entry points daily to ensure that IEP goals are met and students' progress academically. Related Service providers work collaboratively with the classroom teachers in servicing and meeting the individualized needs of all students. Students who are English Language Learners receive instruction based on their mandated hours by classroom teacher and ENL coordinator/provider through integrated 0  (push in) and stand alone services.. Specific and individualized services are provided based on data from NYSELAT and EDAT. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. According to the Framework for Great Schools, PS 251 made the most progress in developing and implementing rigorous instruction, especially in mathematics, and creating a supportive environment. Teachers have attended many professional developments to help increase the rigor in all subject areas. This past year, we incorporated data conferences, to which administrators and teachers reviewed trends in student performance data. Our key area of focus for the 2018-2019 school year is to work on trust between teachers, administration, students and staff. Although this has significantly improved this year, our school believes trust is key in a successful school environment. We have implemented a character education program that we hope will continue to build a strong community between all staff, students, administration, and parents. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 22K251 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 524 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 59 58 18 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 2 N/A 18 18 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 74.0% % Attendance Rate 72.7% % Reduced Lunch 6.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 16.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 5.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 2% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 29.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 92% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 49 50 91.4% 0.4% 19.5% 72.9% 2.9% 2.7% 2 5% 6.7 25.8% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Students have shown gains in Mathematics based on NYS Math scores (5% gain) for the 2017-2018 year. These gains were also reflected on the results of June's end of year performance tasks. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 1-3% increase in the number of students performing on grade level in mathematics as measured by school created assessments, performance based assessments and I-Ready assessments. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? * Weekly Professional development for teachers of all grades, full time ELL teacher for push in and pull out model to support instruction, Push in services form Individual Education Plan Teacher/SETSS provider/AIS Provider Students of grades Kindergarten to five 9/2018 - 6/2019 Principal,Assistant Principal IEP Teacher, ENL Teacher, Classroom Teacher * Professional Development Cycle with a clear emphasis on Engaging all Learners/Differentiation(3c) through effective planning(1e) with frequent formative assessments (3d). * Weekly Data Inquiry periods for teachers to understand students' current functional levels and make instructional decisions about the curriculum and instruction. The instructional based programs will Go Math and Engage NY mathematics Program. Professional Development provided by staff developer, teacher development coach and Principal and Assistant Principal, Teachers will engage in classroom inter-visitations to support and model best practices. Utilize a push in / pullout services for students with Disabilities from the Individual Education Plan teacher/SETSS Provider/AIS Provider. Student will participate in after school program. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Students of grades Kindergarten to five Students of grades Kindergarten to five 9/2018 - 6/2019 Principal,Assistant Principal IEP Teacher, ENL Teacher, Classroom Teacher 9/2018- 6/2019 Principal,Assistant Principal IEP Teacher, ENL Teacher, Classroom Teacher How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly parent workshops to inform parents on resources within the curriculum to support student progress conducted by Teachers, Staff Developer, Assistant Principal and Parent Coordinator. These workshops will include: Understanding the area of focus based on mathematical standards, use of Mathletics math application program, the Common Core curriculum in Reading and Mathematics and Engage NY resources for parents. Parents will also be provided progress report from Teachers to monitor students . During Parent Engagement Tuesdays, parents can 4  discuss their child's progress and curriculum information with their child's teacher. The second Tuesday of each month, there is "Tutoring Tuesdays", where the parents will receive tutoring or instructional support in Mathematics as parents have expressed challenges with the math curriculum. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Some of the aligned resources which ensure that this goal is met is the purchase of Smart Boards, computer programs (hardware, software), Engage NY problem of the week , IReady/Ready books, Path Blazers computer based reading program , as well as, ELL after school program and Saturday academy where staff members receive per session to provide additional Math instruction outside of school hours. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2019, there will be a 2% increase in the number of students performing on grade level in mathematics as measured by the following Mid year Assessments: Schoolnet, Engage NY to measure student progress; assessments via Go Math and performance assessments conducted in NY I-Ready software based program. Student progress reports. In March 2019, for progress monitoring students were measured in the following Mid year Assessments: Engage NY, Go Math performance assessments and I - Ready diagnostic assessments. The I Ready assessment is used to diagnose overall performance of students. The diagnostic results are listed below. As per the data our school is progressing towards meeting our goals. Percentage of students on or above grade level Percentage of students on or above grade level Grade Level Grade 3 Grade 4 Grade 5 Fall Assessment 2% 15% 14% Winter Assessment 21% 30% 19% Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Schoolnet , NY I-Ready, Fountas and Pinell Benchmarks and computer based assessment programs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Last year in an attempt to reduce conflict, the goal required 90% of teacher to teach conflict resolution lessons. Though this goal was met, there was an increased rate of level 2 student to student incidents based on OORS reports. In an effort to build strong classroom relationships between all students and the adoption of Positive Behavior Intervention System coupled with the Sanford Harmony Program was initiated. It is our goal to build self-esteem and recognize positive behaviors thus reduction the number of punitive actions taken at the school level. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 90 % of our teachers will continue to implement, Sanford Harmony social-emotional learning program to ensure students learn in a safe and culturally inclusive environment, in order to increase respectful behavior among students by 10% of teachers moving to effective and highly effective on Domain 2, Component A. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers and administrators will participate in Sanford Harmony advisory program. This will be conducted daily throughout 2018-2019 school year and will continue with a designated time scheduled for all classes. The school will collaborate and celebrate and honor student academic, social and emotional progress to be held once a month at a school wide assembly. School will provide school wide award incentive program for students that model good practice as per positive behavior intervention and supports program. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers and Administrators Administrators, teachers and the Parent Coordinator Students Grades Kindergarten to Grade 5 Administrators Sept 2018 June 2019 Sept 2018-June 2019 teachers parents students Administrators and teachers Sept 2018 Administrators and Teachers Tuesday afternoons will provide parent outreach opportunities. June 2019 parents Workshops informing parents of positive behavior intervention and supports program will be conducted three times throughout the year to inform parents of school wide "ROAR" program. informal and formal observations will measure levels of peer and teacher respect. Administrators will observe the implementation of strategies learned from the Sanford Harmony training during informal and formal classroom visits. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administrators and teachers Sept 2018 Administrators June 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Workshops informing parents of positive behavior intervention and supports program will be conducted three times throughout the year to inform parents of school wide "ROAR" program and PBIS Rewards student incentive program. In addition, workshops will be conducted throughout the year by Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator and SAPIS informing parents on respect for all program. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 8  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School resource website,   parent engagement application,  positive behavior intervention system school wide reward incentive program.  reward incentives for students Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2019, data from Advance in Domain 2 as well as consistent monitoring of OORS reports will evaluate the progress of this initiative. Conferences and surveys will measure the rate of incidents among students. Data from PBIS rewards program will monitor student progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Online Occurrence data, Monitor student referrals, Monitor student incentive program, school created survey for students Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the end of year review of Fountas and Pinnell reading levels, 38% of students are reading below grade level. Teacher survey identified this is an area of support. In an effort to provide students with specific strategies to become autonomous on text, professional learning sessions will focus on refining current literacy instruction to improve scaffold to support student learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of teachers will participate in professional learning cycles that will result in a 10% growth in student progress as measured by students moving two reading levels in Fountas and Pinnell benchmark assessments. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The professional learning cycle will be divided into four distinct categories. Week one will provide teachers with a learning session to refine their practice and learn new strategies. Week two will provide time for teacher teams to meet in order to plan their new learning to practice. Week three invites teachers to collect and analyze the impact of the newly implemented instructional practice. Weeks four through six assembles teachers vertically to share the impact of this practice with their colleagues with samples of student work. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Administrators and teachers Administrators will observe these strategies during formal and informal classroom visits and review of lesson plans. Teachers and students Sept 2018-June 2019 Administrators and teachers Different levels of support will be given as identified by Advance data. New teachers will be assigned mentors. Ambassadors will be identified and attend monthly meetings to share with colleagues. Inter-visitations will be arranged so colleagues can benefit from each other's expertise. Students proficiency levels in mathematics will be formally and informally assessed over the school year. Results will be monitored by administrators via data conferences with teachers. Teachers and students Sept 2018-June 2019 Administrators and teachers Teachers and students Sept 2018-June 2019 Administrators and teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly parent workshops to inform parents on resources within the curriculum to support student progress conducted by Teachers, Staff Developer, Assistant Principal and Parent Coordinator. Parents will also be provided progress report from Teachers to monitor students . Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Targeted Professional Development to support teachers based on feedback from cycle of observations. Classroom inter visitation Cycles. Compass Learning and NY I-Ready assessment based programs . Use Of Core curriculum 1  materials to support instruction. Professional Development Workshop from Assistant Principal. Foutas and Pinell bencmark kits. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2019, student performance in literacy will be reviewed on mid year assessments. Advance data will also be analyzed to examine progress in grouping of students appropriately, domain 3C. Benchmark levels will be monitored through F&P benchmark assessment coupled with assessments from Journeys and I-Ready. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mid year benchmark to monitor student progress, School created periodic assessment to monitor competency levels. Grade specific literacy activities to monitor student progress in grade specific standards. Student Progress in NY I-Ready and Compass Learning computer based programs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on an analysis of Advance data, 41% of teachers are ineffective or developing using assessment in instruction, Danielson component 3d to support student learning. Information from teacher self-reflections and an end of year survey also indicate that teachers would like to receive more support in this domain. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school administrators will ensure high quality math instruction in grades K- 5 by an increase of 10% of teachers scoring Effective in Domain 3d (Using Assessment in instruction) as measured by the Danielson Rubric. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional learning will focus on student engagement, differentiation and discussion techniques in a formatted professional learning cycle to support all students Teachers Sept2018-June 2019 Administrators and teachers Formal and informal observations will monitor impact of professional learning. Teacher feedback conferences will monitor progress. Teachers Sept2018-June 2019 Administrators and teachers Inter visitations (Writing prompts and model of best practices will contain essential questions that challenge student thinking and monitor student independence and mastery). Student work will be collected and reviewed. Teachers Sept2018-June 2019 Administrators and teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. There will be opportunities for family involvement during the school day, evenings and weekends will be offered on a monthly basis to all PS 251 families. The school's instructional focus in regards to family engagement will be the focus of the workshops. It will incorporate community resources and best at home practices to support student learning. Parent will also be provide a monthly newsletter which analyzes components of the common core curriculum. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Feedback from observation cycles. Targeted Professional development from providers. Google docs Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other 4  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Advance data and observation cycle data will be used to monitor progress. Mid year January assessment. Professional learning cycles via professional development. Google doc survey to measure impact on students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Data, Teacher observation cycle, Teacher Feedback Conference Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school provides multiple opportunities(parent workshops, Parent's as Learning Partners, Tutoring, trips) for parents to participate in instructional and school/community based initiatives; however, we have a few core parents that are involved in these initiatives. This evidence is based on our attendance/sign in sheets from PTA meetings, monthly parent workshops and school events. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase parent involvement by 10% by conducting 5 workshops (celebrations) to provide families with supports based on our curriculum and school based nutritional programs as measured by agendas, surveys and attendance sheets. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Learning Leaders, LEAP, Parents as learning partners Parent volunteers 9/2018- 6/2019 Parent volunteers 9/2018- 6/2019 Learning Leaders program to train parent volunteers to help students with homework after school, in connection with the existing Outside School Time program Class parents to be chosen, one from each class, to be the liaison between school and home Parents will participate in monthly assemblies that promote student academic progress and good citizenship Parent volunteers 9/2018- 6/2019 School wide workshops to inform parents of community resources and available services. Parent volunteers 9/2018- 6/2019 There will be opportunities for family involvement during the school day, evenings and weekends will be offered on a monthly basis to all PS 251 families. Information regarding these opportunities will be disseminated through flyers, our school website and via telephone (school messenger) to families. These opportunities will include family trips, Multicultural events, Family Literacy and Math Nights, Saturday Academic programs, Family Fitness Night, and Parent/ Guardian workshops from community based organizations. Parent/Parent Volunteers 9/2018- 6/2019 Parent coordinator, Parent Teachers Association president and vice president Parent coordinator, Outside School Time staff Parent volunteers Parent coordinator Guidance Counselor Administration Parent Coordinator Community Based organization Outside School Time Teachers, Parent Coordinator, PTA, CBO, Administrators 7  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Flatland Civic Association Bergen Beach Youth Organization Ballet Tech Dance Corporation Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Involvement Funding , Parent as Learning Partners, Parent Workshops, Engage Ny Parent Guides Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monitor parent attendance at the workshops. Utilize school created survey to monitor parent feedback on workshop and programs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Google docs survey Record parent participation at workshops Feedaback forms on each workshop Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ● F&P Benchmark Levels ● Teacher Recommendations Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● Orton Gilliangham ● Small group Instruction During the school day (Reading Intervention) ● Push-in services ● Report card grades ● Journeys PeadingProgram) ● One to one targeted intervention ● Students’ classroom performance ● Guided Reading Instruction  ● Students who are holdovers and potential holdovers ● At-risk students ● ELA State tests scores Formal/informal Assessments ● Unit/Classroom assessment results Mathematics ● Go- Math Tiered Intervention ● Small group Instruction During the school day ● Report card grades ● Think Central ● Push-in services ● Students’ classroom performance ● Quick Quiz(+ -X) One to one targeted intervention ● Re-teaching ● Math State tests scores Technology based instruction 9  ● Teacher recommendations ● Students who are holdovers and potential holdovers Teacher recommendation Science Social Studies Teacher recommendation At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher and/or parents notify guidance counselor ● Scholastic trade books One-on-one or small group During the school day One-on-one or small group During the school day One-on-one or small group During the school day Guided reading Amplify Science Program ● Scholastic trade books Guided reading Passport SocialStudies Program A determination is made by staff as to the best strategy to help student 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have forty six students identified as students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will provide a variety of services to support students in the following areas Academic Programs & educational support services Transportation services when needed Basic/emergency supplies School supplies and resources Research based programs Intervention programs Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). forty two 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1 We will provide a variety of services to support students in the following areas Academic Programs & educational support services Transportation services when needed Basic/emergency supplies School supplies and resources Research based programs Intervention programs 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Staff is recruited via hiring fairs and word of mouth from colleagues Assignments are given based on openings, UFT contractual agreements, student needs PD comes from a variety of sources including staff’s perceived needs, analysis of Advance/Danielson, and program support for Ready Gen and Go Math. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Grade leaders meet weekly as a Vertical Team to support intra-grade congruence of all school-wide initiatives PD programmed by SDC made up of staff and administration Vertical Team meetings occur monthly Teachers are selected for major subjects to participate in the district's Ambassador initiative. Workshops are CCLS-based and ambassadors turn-key Literacy and math programs are CCLS-based Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). There are three Pre- K classes. Teachers are highly qualified and receive PD from city-wide staff. Work Sampling program used to analyze student work and provide next steps All rooms are equipped with mandated furniture and supplies 1 teacher, 1 para, 18 children Pre-k staff involved in all school-wide PD and initiatives Pre-k staff observed formally and informally by administration Pre-K students receive Sanford Harmony (PBIS) instruction on emotions and interacting well with each other. Pre-k social worker visits monthly to provide students with additional support. Parent workshops on age -appropriate benchmarks and transitioning from Pre-k to Kindergarten. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Committees where teachers participate: Cabinet; weekly SDC; bi-monthly Vertical Team; monthly Grade meetings, weekly 4  UFT consultation meetings, monthly SLT, monthly All decisions are collaboratively decided upon. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X NA NA NA X Column B Section Reference(s) Pages 11, 13, 17, 20 NA 13, 17, 20 NA Pages 11, 13, 17, 20 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 391,256.00 104,178.00 11,200.00 0 2,637,856.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 5  conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S 251 Paerdegat, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 251 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 7  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 8  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. PS251 School Parent Involvement Policy To Be Disseminated at Opening 6:00-8:00 PM in the school auditorium PART I – GENERAL EXPECTATIONS P.S. 251 agrees to implement the following statutory requirements: 9  ● The school will put into operation programs, activities and procedures for the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible students consistent with Section 1118-Parental Involvement of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). The programs, activities and procedures will be planned and operated with meaningful consultation with parents of participating children. ● In carrying out the Title I, Part A parental involvement requirements, to the extent practicable, the school will provide full opportunities for the participation of parents with limited English proficiency (LEP), parents with disabilities, and parents of migratory children. This will include providing information and school reports required under Section 111-State Plans of the ESSA in an understandable and uniform format and, including alternative formats upon request, and, to the extent practicable, in a language parents understand. ● The school will involve the parents, activities and procedures in accordance with this definition of parental involvement: Parental involvement means the participation of parents in regular, two-way, and meaningful communication involving student academic learning and other school activities, including ensuring-  that parents play an integral role in assisting their child’s learning;  that parents are encouraged to be actively involved in their child’s education at school;  that parents are full partners in their child’s education and are included, as appropriate, in decision-making and on advisory committees to assist in the education of their child;  the carrying out of other activities, such as those described in Section 1118-Parental Involvement of the PART II DESCRIPTION OF HOW THE SCHOOL WILL IMPLEMENT THE REQUIRED SCHOOL PARENTAL INVOLVEMENT POLICY COMPONENTS 1. P.S. 251 will take the following actions to involve parents in the joint development of the District Parental Involvement Plan (contained in the RDCEP/DCEP Addendum) under Section 1112- Local Educational Agency Plans of the ESSA: Parents will be notified and participate in monthly Community District Education Council meetings. 2. P.S. 251 will take the following actions to involve parents in the process of school review and improvement under Section 1116- Academic Assessment and Local Educational Agency and School Improvement of the ESSA: Parent members of the School Leadership Team will participate in a needs assessment and review of all school activities and functions and make recommendations to the 3. P.S. 251 will coordinate and integrate parental involvement strategies in Title I, Part A with parental involvement strategies under programs such as Learning Leaders and Universal Pre-K. Parents will be invited to evening meetings where important information about academics will be disseminated by the teaching staff. For instance, Social Studies Night, 0  4. P.S. 251 will take the following actions to conduct, with the involvement of parents, an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parental involvement policy in improving the quality of its Title I, Part A program. The evaluation will include identifying barriers to greater participation by parents in parental involvement activities (with particular attention to parents who are economically disadvantaged, are disabled, have limited English proficiency, have limited literacy, or are of any racial or ethnic minority background). The school will use the findings of the evaluation about its parental involvement policy and activities to design strategies for more effective parental involvement and to revise, if necessary (and with the involvement of parents) its parental involvement policies.  DESCRIBING HOW THE EVALUATION WILL BE CONDUCTED: The Parent Survey from the School Report Card will be analyzed and reported to the parent body. The Parent Involvement Plan will be reviewed in this manner and modified as per parental input. Informal feedback during the year will be communicated to the school.  IDENTIFYING WHO WILL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR CONDUCTING IT: A committee will be established made up of members of the  EXPLAINING WHAT ROLE PARENTS WILL PLAY: The parents will take part in all phases of the needs assessment. They will help use the data to revise the Parent Involvement Policy. 5. P.S. 251 will build the parents’ capacity for strong parental involvement, in order to ensure effective involvement of parents and to support a partnership among the school involved, parents, and the community to improve academic achievement, through the following activities specifically described below: ● The school will provide assistance to parents of children served by the school, as appropriate, in understanding topics such as the following, by undertaking the actions described in this paragraph –  the State’s academic content standards;  the State’s student academic achievement standards;  the State and local academic assessments including alternate assessments;  the requirements of Title I, Part A;  how to monitor their child’s progress; and  how to work with educators. IN STATE AND OUT OF STATE WORKSHOPS, CONFERENCES AND/OR CLASSES; A combined effort on the part of the ANY EQUIPMENT OR OTHER MATERIALS THAT MAY BE NECESSARY TO ENSURE SUCCESS: 1  ∙ The school will provide materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their children’s academic achievement, such as literacy training, and using technology, as appropriate, to foster parental involvement by: As one example, the P.S.251 computer teacher will conduct a Parent-Child Computer literacy night workshop whereby all participants will learn the basics of word processing, spreadsheets and graphic design. ∙ The schools will, with the assistance of the district and parents, educate its teachers, pupil services personnel, principals and other staff, in how to reach out to, communicate with and work with the parents as equal partners, in the value and utility of contributions of parents, and in how to implement and coordinate parent programs and build ties between parents and schools by: The P.S.251 staff will avail itself to any and all district professional development in terms of working with parents and community at large. This will be facilitated by creating opportunities to build trust and common understanding between staff and parents. Building on successful programs such as Parents As Reading Partners and Learning Leaders. ∙ The school will, to the extent feasible and appropriate, coordinate and integrate parental involvement programs and activities with Universal Pre-K, Reading First, and Home Instruction Programs for Preschool Youngsters, the parents as teachers program and public preschool and other programs, and conduct and/or encourage participation in activities, such as parent resource centers, that support parents in more fully participating in the education of their children by: The P.S.251 Parent Coordinator will continue to hold parent workshops that involve parenting skills such as stress and anger management, homework help, Dial A Teacher, etc. Parent Resource Center representatives will be invited to speak to the parents of our youngest children offering additional options and making themselves available for private consultations. ∙ The school will take the following actions to ensure that information related to the school and parent programs, meetings, and other activities, is sent to the parents of Title 1 participating children in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon request, and, to the extent possible, in a language the parents can understand: All official meetings and workshops will be advertised and reported via letters to parents as well as PART III DISCRETIONARY SCHOOL PARENTAL INVOLVEMENT POLICY COMPONENTS Other activities may include: ∙ involving parents in the development of training for teachers, principals and other educators to improve the effectiveness of that training ∙ providing necessary literacy training for parents from Title 1, Part A funds, if the school district has exhausted all other reasonably available sources of funding. ∙ paying reasonable and necessary expenses associated with parental involvement, such as transportation and child care. ∙ training parents to enhance the involvement of other parents. ∙ arranging school meetings at a variety of different times. ∙ adopting and implementing model approaches to improve parental involvement. 2  ∙ participating in a District Parent Advisory Council. ∙ developing appropriate roles for CBO’s. ∙ inviting local police and fire department personnel to visit and lecture. ∙ providing other support under Section 1118-Parental Involvement as parents may request. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S 251 Paerdegat , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 3  ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; 4  ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 5  ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. PS251 SCHOOL-PARENT COMPACT To Be Disseminated at Opening 6:00-8:00 PM in the school auditorium The P.S. 251 and the parents of the students participating in activities, services, and programs funded by Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) (participating children), agree that this Compact outlines how the parents, the entire school staff, and the students will share the responsibility for improved student academic achievement and the means by which the school and parents will build and develop a partnership that will help children achieve the State’s high standards. PART I – REQUIRED SCHOOL-PARENT COMPACT PROVISIONS School Responsibilities P.S. 251 will ● Provide high-quality curriculum and instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment that enables the participating children to meet the State’s student academic achievement standards as follows: All pedagogical staff will be State Certified and highly qualified. Academic intervention services will be provided for all children struggling in the areas of 6  After school, morning school and Saturday programs will be provided to present additional instructional time. All staff will utilize teaching strategies from Teachers College and the AUSSIE organization so as to enhance reading and writing skills of all students. All staff will engage in Go Math and Ready Gen reading programs . ● hold a discussion about this Compact as it relates to the individual child’s achievement. Specifically, those conferences will be held: ● provide parents with frequent reports on their children’s progress. Specifically, the school will provide reports as follows: P.S. 251 has a wonderful Learning Leaders program whereby parents can receive training and assist not only in classrooms but can take part in a fluency program called, “Great Leaps”. Class Parents gives parents an opportunity to help out throughout the school year on projects and as Parents As Reading Partners invites parents once a month to come read aloud to children in classrooms. Parent Responsibilities We, as parents, will support our children’s learning in the following ways:  Supporting my child’s learning by making education a priority in our home by:  volunteering in my child’s classroom;  participating, as appropriate, in decisions relating to my children’s education;  promoting positive use of my child’s extracurricular time;  participating in school activities on a regular basis; staying informed about my child’s education and communicating with the school by promptly reading all notices from the school or the school district either received by my child or by mail and responding Standard Department of Education Report Cards will be given to parents three times a year, just prior to the Fall and Spring Open School Weeks, and a final report on the last day of school in June. Staff meets with parents as per the Parents will be notified by all Parents will be notified by all after school and Saturday programs as to the progress of their children. Parents will be notified on an as-needed basis. Staff contact parents for positive reasons as well as when there are issues. ● provide parents reasonable access to staff. Specifically, staff will be available for consultation with parents as follows: 7  All staff will be available to parents on an as-needed basis beyond the above-mentioned formal conference times by appointment and on a mutually agreeable time and date. In case of emergencies, members of the School Based Support Team are available to meet with parents. ● Provide parents opportunities to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities, as follows as appropriate:  reading together with my child every day;  providing my child with a library card;  communicating positive values and character traits, such as respect, hard work and responsibility;  respecting the cultural differences of others;  helping my child accept consequences for negative behavior;  being aware of and following the rules and regulations of the school and district;  supporting the school’s discipline policy;  leading by example;  making education a priority in the home;  monitoring attendance and punctuality and stressing the importance of both;  having a specific time of day when you create private with your child;  asking the child questions to show you are truly interested;  insuring his/her homework space is quiet, clean and private;  participating and volunteering in school-wide activities; don’t wait to be asked;  working with the classroom teachers by suggesting extra-curricular activities;  communicating core values: respect, trust, team-work, tolerance (culture), etc.;  understanding consequences of negative behavior: following rules;  setting high expectations;  expressing high expectations and offer praise and encouragement for achievement. 8  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Title III funds will be used to provide English language instruction and academic support to English language learners at P.S. 251. Parents are sent a letter at the beginning of the program informing them when the program begins and ends. Letters are sent to all ELL parents from Kindergarten through 5th Grade.The Supporting ELLs with Arts Program will provide support for students in grades K-5 with English proficiency levels of entering, emerging, transitioning and expanding and commanding. The students are grouped according to proficiency levels and combined grades, such as, Kindergarten, 1-2, 3-4 and grade 5. Students will have the opportunity to receive academic support that they wouldn't otherwise receive throughout the regular school day to support language development. While students' weaknesses are identified during the school day, there is insufficient time to address all areas of weaknesses and provide intervention. The additional hours after school will allow additional time to address these areas of weaknesses and support increasing language proficiency. Instruction and enrichment for the after school program will be conducted by the ENL teacher and two certified common branches teachers. The ratio of instructional time for ENL and content area teachers will be 3 teachers to 37 students. The Supporting ELLs with Arts Program will run for 20 weeks from October 24, 2018 through April 04, 2019 from 2:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. The program will be supervised by the Assistant Principal. The Supporting ELLs with Arts after school will provide students with direct instruction using instructional strategies built into lesson plans. Lessons will provide guidance to teachers teaching listening comprehension, phonemic awareness, letter recognition, letter-sound recognition, vocabulary, word recognition, decodable text comprehension, and leveled text comprehension. reading comprehension, grammar and conventions and writing. Teachers will support language development by integrating art as a way of building connections that are relevant to students' experiences. Technology will also be included using I-Ready software, Wilson Fundations, Brain POP and HD Word. These materials will be supplementary from those that are used on a daily basis for delivering instruction to students. Analysis of student data from the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) along with NYSESLAT test results, Fountas & Pinnell benchmark reading levels and data from periodic assessments will provide information to assist with grouping students and planning instruction at different grade levels for students. Content will be scaffolded and modified based on individual needs and proficiency levels. Students will be grouped by grade and proficiency levels for instruction based on analysis of students work and performance, observations and recommendations from mainstream classroom teachers. Both the ENL teacher and content area teachers will collaborate to plan instruction and provide tiered instruction using foundational practices as well as targeted interventions to support students. The instructional focus will be centered on improving English proficiency and academic achievement using various teaching strategies and small group instruction. Students will be engaged in activities such as guided reading and provided with opportunities to read, write, listen and speak. Student will also be taught comprehension strategies, question and answer relationships, note taking and how to use various graphic organizers. Home language 0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information support will be provided by integrating students' primary language in teaching vocabulary, identifying and using cognates, routines, small group activities, reading stories, role playing etc. Data and student records will be maintained by the ENL and content area teachers through assessments, anecdotal records, checklist of skills learned and mastered and student self-evaluations. Students enrolled in Supporting ELLs with Arts after school will return attendance forms signed by their parents and teachers will monitor enrollment registers to show the absence or attendance of each student enrolled for the 20 weeks of the after school. Parent notifications will be generated in parents’ preferred language by making request through the Translation & Interpretation Unit or a DOE contracted vendor and utilizing the assistance of bilingual staff members to provide language services. Our goal at P.S. 251 is to boost students’ performance on state tests such as, NYSESLAT, NY State exams by providing intensive instruction in the listening, speaking, reading, writing and comprehension of English to improve strong academic language skills and academic achievement. Our goal is make complex academic English comprehensible to our English Language Learners. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Title III program teachers will receive ongoing professional development to learn different ways of developing strategies for delivering instruction to ELLs. Professional development will provide access to meaningful opportunities for teachers to provide individualized instruction to students in different subgroups to build students language proficiency levels. The professional development offered to teachers will provide knowledge on how they can use data to understand what students are not learning and to find instructional gaps, then determine what they need to learn to help close those gaps. The PDs offered will positively impact English language learners, since student achievement is the goal. When teachers attend PD workshops, they will learn new knowledge and skills they can implement in their classrooms to scaffold instruction that allow students to access content. They can also use what they learn to improve their own teaching. Student learning and achievement will begin to increase because the teacher will use and apply the knowledge they learned in professional development. The ENL teacher will attend different professional development workshops and district ambassador workshops organized by the Brooklyn South Borough Office as well as Central Base workshops. Workshops will be at no cost to the program. The ENL teacher, Camille Royes-Burke will also facilitate professional development workshops during the allotted time on Mondays for 80 minutes per month. Teachers will have the opportunity to learn different strategies they can use to support English language learners in their 1  Part C: Professional Development classrooms. Some of the strategies we will focus on will be useful in helping teachers to scaffold content and language input to children in the process of learning English as a new language. Professional development topics will include: Teaching and student learning strategies, vocabulary teaching, reading and writing strategies for ELL students, Differentiated Instruction for ELLs, Co-teaching and Collaboration for ELLs, Using assessments for English language learners, Modifying Content for ELLs and Best Practices for Teaching ELLs. Records of workshops attended including agendas and attendance sheets will be maintained through Google docs as well as PowerPoint of workshops will be uploaded to P.S. 251 website. All teachers will have the chance to attend professional development workshops offered by the Department of English Language Learners and Student Support (DELLSS) in order to address the needs of their ELL students in their classrooms. All members of staff who work with ELL students during the school year will have the opportunity to attend ongoing workshops offered throughout the district as well as network based workshops for English language learners. Professional Development will be held on Mondays of each week throughout the school year. There will be two to three hour long sessions. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: At P.S. 251 our goal is connect with our ELL families, learn about their culture and integrate those cultural traditions throughout our school. We want to create a welcoming environment where families feel they can communicate with our school community and learn about important topics and the progress of their children in our school. This gives P.S. 251 the chance to encourage parents to volunteer and take leadership roles in order to build a partnership in our school community. Parent orientation takes place at the start of the school year, during this time, parents are provided with different information about their children(s) English proficiency levels and what to expect for the upcoming school year. During orientation, translation services are made available to parents with the assistance of the parent coordinator and bilingual staff members. At various times during the year, families are also sent notifications about their children(s) progress on NYSESLAT, English Language Arts, Math and Science state tests. Parents receive notification in their home languages as well as translation services. Translation is provided by a bilingual member of staff or through the Translation and Interpretation (T & I) Unit for language access at the DOE. Parents are welcome to visit P.S. 251 on Tuesdays from 2:30 p.m. to 3:00 p.m. where they can meet with teachers and discuss topics such as homework, testing, understanding benchmark levels and discuss their children's progress in school. Parents have the chance to discuss their children's academic progress, behavior in school and receive information about areas of strengths 2  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities and weaknesses and how they can help their child/ren achieve success in school. Parents can also make appointments to see teachers outside of time allotted for parent engagement. Additionally, P.S. 251 offers a GED program to support parents in learning English, which helps them with improving their language skills and better equip them to help their children at home. Families are encouraged to attend the program to encourage growth academically and enhance achievement in school. Outreach to families is done in a number of ways to include parents in the school community. This includes phone calls, scheduled face to face meetings on Tuesdays and through the school's website and School App. Parent involvement is integral to the success of the after school program. Parents of ELLs in the after school program will receive regular communication from the teachers involved in the program. They will be sent progress reports and given suggestions on how they can help their child/ren to learn strategies to support their developing language skills at home. School/classroom newsletters, progress reports, phone calls, parent/teacher conferences, event flyers, will be used to establish and maintain lines of communication with parents. P.S. 251 staff members, the Language Access Coordinator as well as the Parent Coordinator will use positive communication activities as well as effective ways to work with parents, students, and members of the school community. Staff will establish and maintain a record of parent contacts throughout the school year using Google docs for saving invitations, flyers in parents’ preferred languages. Also agendas and attendance sheets will be kept on file. Parents will also be invited to visit the school and their children’s classroom regularly. Parents can speak with their child’s class about their native country, a hobby, or their jobs during other parent engagement activities, such as, career day or parent workshops. Parents also have the opportunity to volunteer in their child/ren's classroom throughout the school year through our Reading a Partner every Friday and Cook shop where parent can learn about preparing nutritious meals for their child/ren. It is essential to keep the parents of ELLs informed and up to date with their children’s academic and behavioral progress. Our goal is for our ELL parents to develop an understanding of our school community and culture to support his/her child/ren at home. In addition, progress reports are given to parents to provide concrete advice or strategies on how to help their child/ren. P.S. 251 ensure that communication is in the preferred language to create an open environment where they will feel welcome. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum N/A Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A 3  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 22 School Name Paerdegat Borough Brooklyn School Number 251 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Sheldon Noel Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Camille Royes-Burke Teacher/Subject Area Josephine Niceforo/ Speech Teacher/Subject Area Sadiki Allen/ IEP Related-Service Provider Natalie Cesaire Superintendent Julia bove Assistant Principal Nikeisha Broomfield Coach N/A School Counselor Sonji Daley Parent Colleen Thomas Parent Coordinator Janet Sanchez Field Support Center Staff Member Natalie Hemmings-Noble Other (Name and Title) Tamiko Bell-Dixon/ School Psyc C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 5  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 517 Total number of ELLs 37 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.16% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 251 currently uses Heinmann’s Fountas and Pinnell system to assess students’ literacy development. ELLs literacy progress are evaluated through this system throughout the school year in the months of October, January, March and May. The recording forms from the assessment are kept by the student’s general education teacher to track progress, growth and areas of challenge. The general education teacher and the ENL teacher analyze these forms to diagnose weaknesses and incorporate skills and strategies to strengthen those identified areas of weakness for future lessons, as well as, small group instruction. In addition, the ENL teacher keeps a record of student's progress using a spreadsheet specifically for English Language Learners containing their reading level throughout the school year, in order to track which students are making progress, remaining at the same levels or declining. Data gained from this analysis is used to inform future lessons as well as small group instruction.P.S. 251 also uses Heinmann’s 6  Primary Literacy Assessment to assess early literacy skills in Kindergarten through second grade classes. Data gained from this assessment is interpreted by both the ENL and general education teacher to pinpoint critical areas of need such as, phonological awareness and print knowledge, e.g. alphabet and letter sound recognition , identification of sight words, book awareness and book handling etc.The information from this analysis is used to plan future lessons as well as, determine where individuals and groups are making progress as well providing intervention.Students who are identified far below their peers and grade level standards in literacy, work with the ENL teacher to increase sight word recognition by using Dolch Sight Words as well as letter/sound recognition using Fundations. The data is tracked using a spreadsheet. This method is also used especially for ELLs in upper grades who are no longer in general education classroom environments that focus on early literacy skills. It is essential that ELLs receive a foundation in literacy so that they can have the tools they need to develop close reading skills which is an important step in helping them access more challenging grade-level materials. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The data gathered from the assessments show that our ELLs are often not reading at grade level. As a result, a heavy emphasis has been placed on guided reading instruction in the classroom as well as academic intervention services to enable our ELLs to reach grade level expectations in reading. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of the program for our ELLs through analyzing data from the results of the NYSESLAT, ELA State Exam and Fountas and Pinnell reading levels, ELL Fall and Spring Periodic assessments, BOY and EOY assessments, as well as using information from the EDAT report. Both students’ recent scores and scores from previous years are analyzed to assess their progress for the current year and evaluate their growth from previous years as well. The data is evaluated to ensure students are making progress in all four modalities of listening, speaking, reading and writing. In addition, formative and summative assessments in the classroom as well as students' portfolios are taken into account when assessing and monitoring students' progress. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Summative assessments are used to provide information at the classroom level and to make instructional adjustments and provide interventions. All data is used to plan future instruction to ensure ELLs are progressing academically in areas where they struggle. Once summative data has been gathered, the ENL teacher uses the information to keep track of students progress throughout the year to track strengths and areas for improvement based on the information gathered. The ENL teacher and classroom teachers consistently have informal conversation and review student's work to evaluate their progress and make modifications where necessary. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] P.S. 251 uses ongoing progress data from the NYSESLAT, NYS ELA and Math exams and Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark data to guide instruction for ELLs for the Response to Intervention Framework. The students' English proficiency is assessed and monitored, the literacy program they receive for development of English literacy skills are taken into consideration, information such as, number of years in the ENL program, English and home language literacy, NYSESLAT results, ENL teacher recommendation, content area teacher recommendation, parent or guardian request, samples of student work and a bilingual educational evaluation if the student has or is suspected of having a disability. The data from these assessments serves as a screening process to assess whether or not a particular ELL student skills set are meeting expectations. The school determines additional support services to provide ELLs who have appeared to have made little or no progress or advancement in their proficiency levels. Through progress monitoring, we determine how at-risk students are responding to instruction – taking into account language development and background as well as a comparison with peers’ levels from comparable cultural, linguistic and experiential backgrounds who have received the same or similar intervention. The type of intensive, targeted Tier 2 or 3 intervention an ELL or group of ELLs would receive is tailored to individual or group needs. For example, if a small group of ELLs has made little progress in reading levels according to the data gathered through the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark System, the ENL teacher as well as the classroom teacher would tailor small group instruction to meet these needs. Then through the use of running records, would determine if sufficient progress was made. In addition, our content curriculum comes with 7  instructional materials to meet the needs of students in Tier 2 or 3. Core content is delivered in English through the Go Math, Journeys, Amplify Science and Passport Social Studies curriculums. Journeys and Go Math each come with a “Scaffolded Strategies Handbook” that helps teachers guide their students by providing them with scaffolded instruction, useful strategies and practical routines that are specifically targeted to ELLs. These guides pinpoint various skills a student may be struggling with within each unit and what steps the teacher can take to help them achieve success. However, it is imperative to P.S. 251 to make sure our students’ lack of progress is not due to a systematic issue – i.e. most students are not thriving. If this were to be the case, we would thoroughly examine our Tier 1 instructional core to help pinpoint areas of ineffectiveness or inappropriateness so we could then take the appropriate steps to modify instruction. For example, if it appears that across the board our ELLs have made little or no improvement in their reading levels, the school would provide PD, inter-visitation opportunities to provide a more effective literacy program. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Assessment from the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, ELA, Math State test scores are used to determine trends and monitor students progress. At the beginning of the school year, our school's principal and Assistant school principal along with the ENL teacher review an item analysis of the the ELA and Math State test scores to determine areas of deficiencies and growth for ELL students. The RLAT and EDAT reports are also analyzed to determine students growth percentiles and students who are approaching or have achieved proficiency on the NYSESLAT exams. Students progress from previous year is also monitored. (Data for current year assessments are currently not available) 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Summaries of assessment findings are presented during instructional cabinet meetings with selected staff members and administration. After evaluation of the data the information is shared in person at professional development workshops and meetings within the school. P.S. 251 encourages all mainstream classroom teachers who teach English language learners to get involved in the practice of assessing English language proficiency to share their experiences with the ENL teacher and administrators so that we can continue to refine and improve ways in which we provide feedback and make adjustments to our programs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. P.S. 251 only offers a Freestanding ENL Program. Our school 251 delivers English instruction through our Freestanding ENL program. Lessons are taught by the ENL and mainstream classroom teachers and places emphasis on English language acquisition. In our ENL program, language arts and content-area instruction are taught in English using specific ENL instructional strategies. Students receive stand-alone ENL instruction from the ENL teacher to acquire the language needed for other content areas. The ENL teacher also collaborates with classroom teachers to ensure curricular alignment and continuity of instruction to improve teaching and learning. Students also receive instruction in Integrated ENL classes, where they receive core content area and English language development instruction, including the use of the home/primary language support and appropriate ELL instructional scaffolds to enrich comprehension. The ENL teacher works in collaboration with general education classroom teachers to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. Preparation for classes are made during common planning time to ensure collaborative lesson planning. The school ensures students received the mandated number of instructional minutes by creating a schedule based on the students' language proficiency and grade level based the 8  NYSESLAT test. Instructional minutes are delivered in an Integrated ENL and Stand-alone program based on students' proficiency levels. Students in the Entering group receive a total of 360 minutes broken in a minimum of 180 standalone ENL and 180 integrated ENL/ELA minutes of instruction. Students in the Emerging group receive 90 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction and 90 minutes of flexibility of of standalone or integrated ENL (ELA or any other content area). Students in the Transitioning group receive a total of 180 minutes of English language development instruction. These students will be provided with 90 minutes of flexibility of standalone or integrated ENL (ELA or any other content area). Expanding students receive a total of 180 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area instruction and students who are Commanding will be provided with 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content areas. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Once NYSESLAT scores are released, the ENL teacher creates a schedule to service all eligible students based on their proficiency levels. Former ELL students are included when creating the ENL schedule so that the school can continue to monitor their progress and provide transition services. P.S. 251 does not currently offer HLA, however, students receive differentiated instruction to address native and second language needs. Entering, and Emerging ELLs receive 1 unit of stand-alone ENL while Transitioning receive .5 unit. Entering, Emerging and Expanding ELLs receive 1 unit of integrated ENL while Transitioning and Commanding receive .5 unit. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Both the ENL and general education teachers, use a variety of instructional approaches and methods to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the needs of the Common Core Learning Standards for ELLs. Students receive instruction during English language arts blocks or during content area instructional component. English and ENL methodologies are used provide required services for students.Core content is delivered in English through Journeys, Go Math, , Amplify Science and Passport Social Studies curricula. Journeys and Go Math each include a " Strategies Handbooks” that helps teachers guide their students by providing them with scaffolded instruction, useful strategies and practical routines that are specifically targeted to ELLs. Also, included in Go Math is a Response to Intervention Tier 3 Activities kit. Go Math as well as Passport Social Studies and Science programs come with center activities that focus on vocabulary to support student language learning. Teachers also provide scaffolded lessons in a variety of ways. The first of which is second language support, including native language dictionaries, bilingual glossaries, cognates, a bilingual or more fluent peer helper who speaks the student’s home language as well as a display of content vocabulary accompanied by a translations and visual aids. Teachers incorporate TPR, realia, manipulatives, hands-on activities, modeling to support students during instruction. In addition, to further enhance oral language, idioms, slang and multiple meaning words are explained. Speaking stems are displayed and made accessible to students and cooperative learning groups are incorporated whenever possible. Students are paired with more fluent readers as buddies. Students read along someone they are comfortable with, as well as, listening to how a fluent reader reads. For activities that require writing, ELLs are provided with graphic organizers to support, plan and organize their writing. Support provided is appropriate so the structure and components of the work they are being asked to do are made clear. Furthermore, before a new unit or concept is taught, the teacher accesses prior knowledge, pre-teaches text and grammar structure that relates to the content. Student tasks and assessments are also differentiated to ensure support at different 9  proficiency levels. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? An initial assessment of home language is used for all students enrolling in our school, The NYSITELL determines the students ELL status. The home language survey is given to all entering students and used to identify students who may not be proficient in English. Students who speak Spanish are required to take the Spanish LAB to indicate a home language of Spanish. Students also take the ELL Periodic Assessments in the fall and spring. The periodic assessments are used as a planning resource. Students are also appropriately evaluated throughout the year, some ELLs who take the New York State Math test are provided with the test in their home language. The ENL teacher allows students to use dictionaries, bi-lingual glossaries and other resources that support student home languages throughout the school year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Instruction is differentiated for each of the ELL subgroups. Since SIFEs come to the school system with interrupted or informal education in their home language, there is more emphasis on literacy skills than there would be for other ELLs at their age considering they have a lower storage of literacy knowledge to transfer over when they begin to learn English. Teachers differentiate with strategies such as total physical response and the language experience approach. In addition, teachers use learner-centered, experiential and multi-sensory activities in their lessons whenever possible to make concepts concrete. b. Teachers adjust instruction for Newcomer ELLs in many different ways. There is a stronger focus on second language support including native language dictionaries, bilingual glossaries, cognates, a bilingual or more fluent peer helper who speaks the student’s home language as well as a display of content vocabulary accompanied by a translation and visual aids. Less reliance is placed on the spoken word to communicate meaning; teachers incorporate TPR, realia, manipulatives, hands-on activities, modeling activities and allowing the student to express meaning through pointing, showing or drawing. In order to increase oral language, teachers display print and visuals as supports and lower their use of idioms, slang and their rate of speech. The types of questions asked to Newcomers would begin at simple yes or no questions, then questions that only require a one or two word response and finally questions that ask for a description, retelling, comparison, contrast or summary. c. When an ELL has reached the Developing stage, teachers still continue to use the accommodations listed above. In addition, to further enhancing oral language by explaining idioms, slang and multiple meaning, speaking stems are displayed which relate to the topic at hand and cooperative learning groups are incorporated whenever possible. Students are paired with more fluent readers as buddies to both read for someone they are comfortable with as well as listen to how a fluent reader reads. For activities that require writing, ELLs are given graphic organizer to help simplify the information provided during lessons so the structure and components of the work they are being asked to do are made clear. Furthermore, before a new unit or concept is taught, the teacher accesses prior knowledge, pre-teaches text and grammar structure that relates to the content and puts more of an emphasis on verb tenses as well as academic language. At this level, there is more of a stress on why and how questions that ask students for their opinion, to make judgements and to explain. d. Long Term ELLs continue to receive the accommodations of both Newcomers and Developing ELLs as needed. In addition, the teacher helps students to understand the difference between the social language (BICS) that they would use with their peers and at home, and the academic language (CALPS) that they would use in school. They are also taught note-taking, test-taking and study skills. Students are expected to prove their answers through both oral and written means. Furthermore, ELLs’ knowledge of figurative language and idioms are expanded. Students who are long-term ELLs have received ENL instruction for 7 or more continuous years, data from formal assessments such as the NYS ELA exam and Fountas & Pinnell reading levels as well as informal assessments such as teacher observations and student work are thoroughly analyzed for areas which need of improvement. The ENL teacher and the classroom teacher will focus on the pinpointed skills with the student through individualized small group or one on one instruction. e. The ENL teacher works with FELLs teacher to provide transition services and ensure the student is acclimating well in a general 0  education classroom with less English language support. In addition, FELLs continue to receive ELL testing accommodations on state tests for two years following their exit from the ENL program. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers use various instructional strategies and grade-level materials to help ELL-SWDs that provide both access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development. Teachers use multiple scaffolds by incorporating, print, visual aids, graphic organizers, simpler directions and technology. There is a great deal of interaction with other students, cooperative learning and accountable talk is encouraged in classrooms. In addition, modifications are used when introducing vocabulary like synonyms, antonyms and visuals. P.S. 251 uses the following grade-level materials – Journeys, Go Math, Sadlier Vocabulary, Fundations and Aspire. In addition, Journeys and Go Math each come with a Strategies Handbook” that helps teachers guide their students by providing them with scaffolded instruction, useful strategies and practical routines that are specifically targeted to ELLs and SWDs. In addition, the school has subscriptions to Raz-Kids which sets up an individual account for each child that allows them to listen to, read and answer questions about books on their reading levels. Teachers use varied assessments to evaluate students' competence of different skills and literacy development. During assessments students are given additional time to complete tasks, students are also provided with rubrics and checklists so they can self or peer assess. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? P.S 251 uses curriculum, instruction and school flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English language proficiency in the least restrictive environment. All teachers and service providers of ELL-SWD are given access to the student’s IEP to ensure that they are adjusting their instruction to meet the outlined goals. The ReadyGen and Journeys curriculum is modified with the use of supplemental texts to increase understanding, vocabulary discussions, small group instruction to target specific needs as well as visual and auditory aids such as videos, photographs and maps. Supplements for areas of deficit in reading readiness skills and writing include Sadlier Vocabulary and Fundations. The Go Math curriculum is modified through the use of small group instruction to target specific areas of struggle, teachers use manipulatives and visual aids to provide support to students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. P.S. 251 has targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, Math and other core content areas which target all ELLs that have a need regardless of subgroup or proficiency level.P.S. 251 uses subscriptions for IReady and Compass Pathblazer programs for both ELA and Math intervention. The students are given a diagnostic exam in each subject which identifies their grade level. They then begin instruction based on their identification ranging from Kindergarten through grade 12. This program is aligned to Common Core Standards and target skills where students are deficient. ReadyGEN and Go Math each come with a “Scaffolded Strategies Handbook” that helps teachers guide their students by providing them with scaffolded instruction, useful strategies and practical routines that are specifically targeted to ELLs. Go Math provides a Response to Intervention Tier 3 Activities kit. Go Math as well as HMH’s Social Studies and Science programs come with center activities that focus on vocabulary. In addition, the school provides subscription to Raz Kids which sets up an individual account for each child that allows them to listen to, read and answer questions about books on their reading level. P.S. 251 currently uses Heinmann’s Fountas and Pinnell system to assess students’ literacy development. ELLs literacy progress is evaluated through this system throughout the school year in the months of October, January, March and May. The recording forms from the assessment are kept by the students' classroom teacher to track progress, growth and areas of struggle. The classroom teacher and the ENL teacher analyze these forms to diagnose weaknesses and henceforth incorporate skills and strategies to strengthen those identified areas in future lessons as well as small group instruction. In addition, the ENL teacher has a spreadsheet specific to ELLs containing their reading level throughout the school year in order to track which students are making progress, remaining stagnant and declining. Data gained from this analysis will be used to inform future lessons as well as small group instruction.P.S. 251 also uses Heinmann’s Primary Literacy assessment to assess early literacy skills in Kindergarten through second grade. Data gained from this assessment is interpreted by both the ENL and classroom teacher to pinpoint critical areas 1  of need such as recognition of the letters of the alphabet. The information from this analysis is used to inform future lessons as well as small group instruction. Students who are identified at being far below their peers and grade level standards, as measured by the above assessments as well as informal teacher-created assessments, work with the ENL teacher to increase sight word recognition as well as letter/sound recognition. The data is tracked by means of a spreadsheet. This method is used especially for ELLs in upper grades who are no longer in classroom environments that focus on early literacy skills. It is essential that ELLs receive a foundation in literacy so that they can succeed in their academic career. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? A few improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year. Based on assessment we have done throughout the school year, we noticed that there were weaknesses in the area of reading and writing. We will be a part of a pilot program using HD Word to help students improve in the area of reading and our school is considering TC Writing to help in the area of writing. The ENL Teacher would also like to expand her library with more native language books, especially in Creole. In regards to improvements beyond instruction, the ENL teacher will research, both online and through professional contacts, activities that can assist newly enrolled ELLs. She will then seek to implement them in our school. In addition, she will also seek ways to increase involvement of parents to ensure they feel welcome and informed. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this time, our school does not offer a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. ELLs receive all notices in their parent's preferred language of written communication. This school year students had the opportunity to attend both the Saturday Academy and Supporting ELL Arts After school Program. Saturday Academy is offered to support students during test preparation.The Supporting ELLs with the Arts Program was held to provide instruction in art based projects and assist with building English language learners reading and writing stamina. Students in grades K through 5th grade were required to attend. At the end of both programs, The Bergen Beach Youth Organization - Millennium Development also offers an after school program at P.S. 251 and students are selected through a lottery system, interested parents can apply to have their child/ren to attend the program. The activities that are offered at P.S 251 COMPASS are music (keyboard), Basketball, Soccer, Chorus, Dance, Arts &Crafts, and academic activities that are hands on fun base on what is taught in day school.Grades Pre-K to 2 participate in Cook shop throughout the school year, a federally funded nutrition education program of the Food Bank For New York City. It gives students the knowledge and skills they need to make and appreciate healthy choices through hands-on exploration, cooking and physical activities. This program fosters students’ enjoyment and consumption of healthy food as well as their appreciation for good nutrition and living an active lifestyle. Additionally, 2nd graders participate in a ballet program with the Brooklyn Ballet in February through March and Brooklyn Tech in May. In addition to learning ballet, students are taught content-specific vocabulary as well as note-taking skills about the specific movements they see. There is a culminating show at the end of the program. Finally, the Hance Family Foundation - Beautiful Me program is offered through the Guidance Counseling office in our school. Beautiful me is a self-esteem program designed to educate females by promoting appreciation for their genuine qualities, accurate self awareness and satisfaction for helping others. the program is offered for 3 weeks. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. P.S. 251 uses a variety of instructional materials to support ELLs in core content areas as well as language development. In terms of language, we provide students access to bilingual glossaries, native language dictionaries and translations of vocabulary displayed in the classroom. In addition, teachers make use of multimedia resources through SmartBoard technology to make learning less reliant on teacher talk; such resources include videos, songs, virtual tours and photographs. During Stand-alone periods, the ENL teacher uses the online program, such as, Reading A-Z, which includes a plethora of resources specifically for English Language Learners, to strengthen reading comprehension skills. ELLs are provided with access to IPads at the teachers discretion to use applications that target specific skills that need practice such as, sight words or phonics or provide listening activities. 2  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? P. S. 251 does not currently offer a Dual Language or Transitional Bi-lingual education program. Home language support is delivered in the Freestanding ENL program as well as the general education classrooms. ELLs are equipped with dictionaries in their native language as well as bilingual glossaries that are both general and content-specific. In addition, vocabulary related to the unit of study is displayed in the room and accompanied by a visual as well as a translation. Teachers use Google Translate as a quick, on the spot tool to clarify particular words that students seem to be having difficulty with. The ENL teacher also encourage students to use the app Duolingo for schools a language learning platform that includes a language learning website and app as well as a digital language proficiency assessment exam. Lastly, newly admitted ELLs are given a buddy who speaks their home language as well as English to help them throughout the school day from anything including general procedures to content. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The school ensures all required services and resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade level. In the mainstream classroom, teachers are using resources that correspond to a grade-level curriculum in reading, math and other content areas. In addition, the ENL teacher collaborates with classroom teachers to incorporate the skills and content they’re working on into her stand alone periods as well as adhering to the Common Core Learning Standards. Furthermore, many of the resources the ENL teacher brings into her stand alone program have been recommended at PDs specific to teaching ELLs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? P. S. 251 is not a collocation. Students who attend our school do not share the building or resources. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs are not usually attending school before the beginning of the school year, however, when new ELLs come throughout the school year, they are given a tour of the school to make them aware of their new environment. Students are provided with opportunities to get accustomed to their new surroundings. The students are buddied up with a staff member such as a teacher, parent coordinator, occupational therapist or paraprofessional who speak the same language so they do and can have a caring relationship with the student, so they can express their frustrations, as well as, become familiar with the school. Students are also provided with varying assignments such as, doing puzzles, drawing, tracing, copying, listening to audio recordings on the computer, browse through picture dictionaries etc. to become familiar with English vocabulary and their new culture. Students are also designated a classroom buddy that speak their language and can assist making their transition to their new environment and provide daily opportunities for them to be successful when learning a new language. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? There are currently no language electives offered to our ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 3  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL personnel will participate in professional development provided. The ELL professional development will take place during our Monday professional development sessions and Network professional development. Teachers of ELL students will participate in workshops facilitated by the ENL teacher, workshop will include: ENL curriculum strategies for ELLs, Overview of the NYSESLAT, ELL Periodic and Interim Assessment Components, instructional strategies for working with ELLs in the mainstream classroom. The ENL teacher will continue to discuss ENL strategies, methodologies, and students’ progress with classroom teachers. The ENL teacher through affiliation with professional organizations related to second language acquisition stays up to date with the current research on instruction of English Language Learners.The ENL teacher receives professional development from our Administrative Team and workshops offered by our district borough office as well as, The Department of English Language Learners and Student Support and the United Federation of Teachers.The ENL teacher facilitates Professional Development throughout the year on ELLs to our staff. ELL training for general education teachers and 10 hours for special education will be fulfilled through our Monday professional development sessions where teachers will participate in the professional development workshops listed above. Topics will range from second language development, ENL strategies and scaffolds that can be put into place to ensure our ELLs are fully engaged in the Common Core Learning Standards. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our ENL teacher attends various professional development workshops throughout the year that provide research-based strategies and practical, hands-on tools to help you develop effective classroom activities, including meeting the demands of the Common Core State Standards. The school will continue to make available professional development to all teachers and administrators that focus on the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 will be devoted to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For the English as a new language teacher, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours will be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Records of these workshops are kept by agendas and sign in sheets for attendance to the workshops. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? P.S. 251 provides annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs throughout the school year to discuss goals of the ENL program, the language development process, language proficiency assessment results and language development needs in all content areas. Beginning in October, after reviewing NYSESLAT results, the ENL teacher sets up individual meetings with the parents of ELLs during the 75 minutes block on Tuesdays allotted for parent engagement activities. Meetings are often one on one with the ENL teacher or sometimes include the general education teacher. During meetings the ENL teacher discusses students progress, ways in which shows parents can provide support and provide the parents with examples of their child’s work to illustrate areas of strength as well as areas that need improvement. Following this, the parent has the time to ask any questions or discuss any concerns they might have.When the notification of the annual meeting is sent out to the parent in their preferred language of written communication, when scheduling meetings parents indicate whether or not they would like a translator to be present. If it is indicated that they would like one, the proper arrangements are made 4  to provide one for the parent. Records are kept for annual individual meetings of ELL parents as well as outreach to ensure parents’ needs are being accommodated. The ENL teacher keeps copies of the initial notifications sent to parents inviting them to come to a meeting. The ENL teacher also keeps track of which parents attend. If further outreach if necessary for parents who did not attend, contact is made through means of phone calls, as well as a second written invitation for the parent to attend meetings. After each parent meeting, the ENL teacher makes note of questions or concerns raised by the parent that would require a follow-up conferences or a phone call. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. At the beginning of the school year, all parents are invited to a “Getting to Know You” session where parents can learn information about the programs offered in the school. They also meet staff members that they will work with . Additionally, the parent coordinator provide various workshops for parents throughout the school year. For example, before Parent Teacher Conference, parents are invited to learn how to get the most out of meeting with their child’s teacher, information such as, what questions to ask and how to read a report card. Additionally, there is a conflict resolution workshop where the parent coordinator along with the SAPIS worker, provide parents with different methods of communicating with their child’s teacher. The goal of P.S. 251 is to provide parental guidance to help increase positive home support of school. Our objective is to assist ELL parents to volunteer in the classroom as well as at school events to have them promote information about their home language and continue to support home language literacy. We offer resources in many different languages so that the school is showing that we value all languages and the preservation of them. Parents are invited to book clubs sessions in our school library on Saturdays during our Saturday Academy Program, where they learn to use strategies to help their children with reading and comprehension. Our school also provides translation and interpretation or uses a parent buddy system, pairing parents of similar backgrounds together at a multicultural commemorative event. This helps to create opportunities for parents to engage in sharing their home cultures and their own knowledge. This also encourages and promotes a positive attitude to ELL students about their first language and learning experiences. This collaborative event is facilitated by the ENL teacher, parent coordinator, mainstream teachers, administration, parents and students. Accommodations are in place at P.S. 251 to encourage parent involvement. Parents are often provided with translation and interpretation services during parent teachers’ conferences, registration of new students, or any event where parents are required to participate in school events. Parents are notified of these events through regular multi-modal communication of written letters, phone calls, emails and event flyers. The use of the families L1 is also used to communicate with families. Information is also posted on P.S. 251 School’s website. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Sheldon Noel, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S.251 School DBN: 22K251 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Sheldon Noel Title Principal Nikeisha Broomfield Assistant Principal Janet Sanchez Parent Coordinator Camille Royes-Burke ENL/Bilingual Teacher Colleen Thomas Parent Sadiki Allen/ IEP Teacher/Subject Area Josephine Niceforo/ Speech Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Sonji Daley Julia Bove Sammatha Barret Natalie Cesaire Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Academic Policy Other Occupational Therapist Tamiko Bell-Dixon Other School Psychologist N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 22K251 School Name: The PaerdegatSchool Superintendent: Julia Bove The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Camille Royes-Burke ENL Coordinator/Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S. 251 uses various data and methodologies to assess the language preferences of the parent community for both oral and written communication. One way data is collected is through the “home/native language” section under student information and the “parent/guardian preferred language written and spoken” section under parent/guardian information on the Student Registration Form. Another way is through the Home Language Identification Survey. Part 3 requires parents to list the language in which they would like to receive written information from the school and in which language they would like to communicate orally with school staff. In addition, the Adult Preferred Language Report (RCPL) in ATS provides the school with information about a parent’s or other relatives spoken language and written language of choice. Also the Emergency Contact Card lists the preferred written and oral language of communication of the parent or guardian the student resides with as well as that of another family member. Lastly, at the beginning of each year, each student is sent home with the Parent’s Preferred Language Form to get up to date information on the language their parents would like to receive written communication from the school as well as communicate orally with school staff. 8  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral In P.S. 251, parent’s preferred languages for oral communication are English, Arabic, Urdu, Haitian Creole, Spanish and Bengali. Parent’s preferred languages for written communication are English, Arabic, Urdu, Spanish, Haitian Creole and Bengali. Based on the Adult Preferred Language Report (RCPL), 728 parents preferred written language is English, 22 Spanish, 1 French, 15 Haitian Creole, 3 Bengali, 30 Arabic, and 4 Urdu . English 91% Spanish 2.75 % French 0.13% Haitian 1.5 % Bengali 0.38 % Arabic 3.75 % Urdu 0.5 % Based on the Parents Preferred Language Report (RCLP), 721 parents preferred spoken language is English, 24 Spanish, 15 Haitian Creole, 1 French, 31 Arabic, 3 Bengali and 5 Urdu. English 90.13% Spanish 3% French 0.13 % Haitian 1.88 % Arabic 3.88 % Bengali 0.38 % Urdu 0.63 % 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. There are no other languages that represent at least a 10% population of school. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 9  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families Documents that require translation on a monthly basis are as follows: September - Newsletter, Overview of school curriculum, after-school program information, Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur recess notification, Hispanic Heritage Month October - Newsletter, Columbus Day notification, ELL After School Letter Throughout the year, there are many documents that require translation including all documents providing critical information about a student’s education. Letters from school leadership as well as field trip parent notification/ consent forms are translated throughout the year as needed. In addition, all documents related to the ENL identification process, such as the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), the Parent Survey & Program Selection Form, placement letters and entitlement letters (entitlement, continued entitlement, non-entitlement, non-entitlement/transition) are translated whenever a new ELL enters our building. Newsletters, School Messenger, P.S. 251 School AOverview of school curriculum, after-school program information, Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur recess notification, PTC notification, Sample STARS Report Card, Thanksgiving recess notification, Winter Recess notification - Newsletter, mid-winter recess notification. PTC notification, Sample STARS report card Newsletter, Spring Recess notification, NYS ELA Exam notification, NYS Math Exam notification, NYSESLAT notification Newsletter, End of Year Conference notification, NYS Science Exam notification, HIV/ AIDS Parent Notification letter Newsletter, Translation & Interpretation Quality Survey, Sample STARS Report Card November -Newsletter, PTC notification, Sample STARS Report Card, Election Day, Thanksgiving recess notification translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. P.S. 251 plans to provide interpretation services by using the services of a DOE contracted vendor. The school will also use over-the-phone Interpretation Services. Our school also provide interpretation at meetings, conferences and school activities by using on-site services. Bilingual staff assist families when necessary to provide translation and interpretation services 0  December - Newsletter, Winter Recess notification - Newsletter January - Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Day February - Newsletter, Lunar New Year, Mid-Winter Recess Notification March - Newsletter, PTC notification, Sample STARS report card, Spring Recess Notification April - Newsletter, Spring Recess notification, NYS ELA Exam notification, NYS Math Exam notification, NYSESLAT notification May - Newsletter, End of Year Conference notification, Memorial Day, 1  NYS Science Exam notification, HIV/ AIDS Parent Notification letter June - Newsletter, Translation & Interpretation Quality Survey, Anniversary Day, Clerical Day, Eid al Fitr, Sample STARS Report Card 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Throughout the school year, the formal face-to-face meetings with parents include Anticipated informal interactions include calls or discussions about long term absences from the attendance teacher, school adjustment and junior high school information from the guidance counselor, an illness or injury from the nurse, IEP referrals from the psychologist and conflict intervention from the social worker. In addition, interaction takes place constantly between the classroom teachers and the parents in regards to each student’s progress as well as areas in need of improvement. Services are provided as follows: Parent Orientation September, PTCs in November and March. Testing Night in April and the End of the Year plan to provide interpretation service(s)? P.S. 251 plans to provide interpretation services by using the services of a DOE contracted vendor. The school will also use over-the-phone Interpretation Services. Our school also provides interpretation at meetings, conferences and school activities by using on-site services. Parent Orientation September, PTCs in November and March, Testing Night in April and the End of the Year Conference as well as Curriculum Night in May. 2  Conference as well as Curriculum Night in May. Bilingual staff assist families when necessary to provide translation and interpretation services. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The Language Access Coordinator (LAC) track the language preferences of families to verify parents language access needs. The LAC assist in developing a Translation & Interpretation Plan along with administration and notify staff members who are bilingual and are to communicate directly with limited English proficient parents in a different language that they should be readily be available to communicate with parents in the event of an emergency. P.S. 251 also uses School Messenger and our school App to communicate with families. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Language Access Coordinator will facilitate the provision of language access services and make sure everyone in the school is aware of providing language access to assist parents. The LAC will provide staff members including office staff, security, classroom teachers of the school with the Language Identification Guide. The LAC will also send a letter to school staff reminding them of their responsibility to to communicate with LEP Parents the resources available for use. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) PS 251 fulfills parent notification requirements for translation and interpretation services as per Section VII of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663. At the primary entrance of the school, the welcome poster and signs regarding visitors access in the covered languages are posted. The Language ID Guide is visible at both the security desk and in the office. Furthermore, all parents are provided with a copy of the Parents’ Bill of Rights, the Expect Success Guide and the Parent’s Guide to Language Access brochure in their preferred language of written communication. 3  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? PS 251 will gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of translation and interpretation services with a survey. The survey will be distributed by the LAC at the beginning of June after being translated into all of our parent’s preferred languages of written communication. It will contain two questions to assess if parents felt their needs were met in regards to language services: 1. Did you feel your school adequately translated school documents in your preferred language? Circle One: Always Sometimes Never 2. Did you feel your school adequately provided translation services in your preferred language? Circle One: Always Sometimes Never Those parents who indicated ‘sometimes’ or ‘never’ on either or both questions will be called by the LAC with the Translation & Interpretation Unit’s over-the-phone interpretation services to further clarify why they did not feel their needs were met. All feedback will be recorded by the LAC to further enhance these services in the upcoming school year. In addition, whenever a parent is contacted through the Translation & Interpretation Unit’s over-the-phone interpretation services, the staff member using the services will ask the parent at the end of the conversation if they feel their translation and interpretation needs are being met. If the parent indicates that they are not being met, the staff member will record their feedback and give it to the LAC in order to improve the language assistance services provided at our school. 4 
