 22K255 School Name: P.S. 255 BARBARA REING SCHOOL Principal: KELLY MCCANN   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S. 255 The Barbara Reing School 22K255 332200010255 PK, 0K, 01, 02, 03, 04, 05, SE 1866 East 17 th Street 718-376-8494 School Number (DBN): 718-627-0626 Fax: School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: Ana Mandelbaum AMandelbaum@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Kelly L. McCann Phillip Konig Olga Obertos Ana Mandelbaum Marta Tutka N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 22 Julianna Bove Superintendent: 5619 Flatlands Ave, Brooklyn, NY 11234 Superintendent’s Office Address: JBove@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-968-6115 Phone Number: (718) 968-6252 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: 22 Executive Director’s Office Address: Mauriciere De govia Executive Director: 415 89th Street Brooklyn, NY 11209 MDegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4862 Phone Number: 718-759-4960 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Kelly L. McCann Toby Mehl-Designee Olga Obertos Patricia Grillo Gabriella Casco Rizzo AnaMandelbaum PatriciaIkonomou JanineFraumeni MaryGrande Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Member/ ElectedUFT Member/ Elected UFT Member/ Elected UFT Member/ Elected UFTPara   Name JulieAmirov Olga Obertos Gabriella Casco Rizzo Hulya Yalcin Samia Hanif Oksana Chakhovska Maysara Muratova Terri Cohen Lucy Antoine Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Elected UFT Member/ Elected Parent Member/ Elected Parent Member/Elected Parent Member/Elected Parent Member/Elected Parent Member/Elected Parent Member/Elected Parent Member/Elected Parent   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At P.S.255, the administration, faculty, staff, parents, and community are dedicated to pursuing the highest intellectual, physical, emotional and social standards for every child at our school. We believe firmly in our core values and recite them each morning. “Here at P.S. 255, we all SHINE! We are supportive; we always help one-another.. We are honest; we always tell the truth. We are inspiring; we strive to help people be the best they can be. We are non-judgmental; we do not judge people by the way they look or how they act. We are efficient; we are effective in getting things done.”   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We are a multi-cultural school with a diverse population. Our school is situated in the heart of Gravesend, Brooklyn and is part of District 22. We pride ourselves on our ability to teach all students regardless of whether they are new immigrants, gifted and talented, or have special learning needs. Everyone is made to feel at home at P.S. 255 and is respected and valued for their similarities as well as their differences. At P.S. 255, we employ an excellent staff of teachers, paraprofessionals, and support staff who are dedicated to our children’s educational success and who are highly qualified in their areas of expertise. For example, in addition to our licensed classroom teachers, we employ a computer specialist, two art instructors, a science teacher, library teacher, a dance instructor and a musician as cluster teachers who work with the students throughout the week. P.S.255 has partnered with the National Dance Institute and through in-school partnerships, workshops, and public performances, NDI uses dance as a catalyst to engage children and motivate them towards excellence. In addition, partnerships with Puppetry in Practice, Education in Dance, Construction Kids, The Highline, Beecher's Foundation, Hudson River Park Trust, Brooklyn Public Library and New York Aquarium have proved to be valuable experiences for our students. In addition, connections with world class museums such as the Brooklyn Museum of Art, Queens Museum of Art, Guggenheim Museum, The Museum of Modern Art, and The Museum of Jewish Heritage have opened their doors to our students. Moreover, P.S. 255 is working closely with various groups to build capacity amongst our school community. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our school community includes a large population of English as a New Language (ENLs) and Students with Disabilities (SWDs). About 23% of our students are English Language Learners and 17% of our students are identified as Students with Disabilities. Our students speak an amazing 37 languages! 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Over the past year, we have made wonderful progress in implementing an academically rigorous curriculum that is differentiated to meet the needs of all students; this is evident in our ELA and math gains in city and school based assessments. This year, we will continue to work on promoting conversations in the area of mathematics. We will continue to work with groups of teachers to design, implement, and reflect on rigorous, differentiated, and standards-based lessons that promote student learning through improved instruction in the area of mathematics. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 22K255 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 936 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 35 35 41 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 41 41 7 7 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 77.0% % Attendance Rate 70.8% % Reduced Lunch 22.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 10.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 64.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.08 0% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 51.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 91% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 95 91 41 94.2% 5.7% 16.1% 2.5% 21.7% 1.7% 4 5% 7.4 59.7% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. · End of Year 2017-2018 1 st Grade F & P data shows that 61% of ELL students (31/51) are far below grade level. · End of Year 2016-2017 MOSL selection data from 1 st grade indicated a need for improvement in the reading standard. The overall EOY average proficiency was 77%. The data shows that about 9% of students scored a level 1, 15% of students scored a level 2, 32% scored a level 3 and 45% scored a level 4. End of Year 2017-2018 MOSL selection data from 1st grade shows a continued need in this area. The overall EOY average proficiency was 86%. The data shows that about 9% of students scored a level 1, 5% of students scored a level 2, 17% scored a level 3 and 69% scored a level 4. · Performance on ELA tasks demonstrated student difficulty with complex texts, as reflected in the Common Core Learning Standards. · Evidence gathered in both administrative and superintendent walk-throughs exhibited progress in using the new CCLS- aligned curriculum. Teachers need to continue to work on modifying the curriculum to meet the needs of all students and ensure cohesion between the classrooms. Trends in student performance show that the majority of students require more support in using close reading strategies and in using academic vocabulary. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By providing rigorous instruction, by June 2019, 80% of the lowest 15% of second grade English Language Learners will increase at least two reading levels, as evidenced by the Fountas and Pinnell 1st Grade Reading End of Year Assessment to the Fountas and Pinnell 2nd Grade Reading End of Year Assessment. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Utilize a standards based curriculum that replicates the strategies for reading complex texts in grades K-2. Curriculum will reflect age appropriate and authentic texts for students according to the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers will also utilize an intensive guided reading program. Teachers will receive ongoing professional learning on close reading strategies and using the new curriculum. Teachers will meet in teacher teams to create modifications for English as a New Language (ENL), Students With Disabilities (SWD) and Enriched learners to support the needs of all students. All students, with modifications and accommodations for various subgroups Between September 2018 and June 2019 Grade 2 classroom teachers will implement. Instructional Coach and Administration will oversee. Grade 2 classroom teachers will use a Common Core aligned curriculum. Curriculum maps using the curriculum will be created by teacher teams. Provide multiple entry points to help all students achieve academic success. Teachers will be given continuous professional development on UDL, multiple entry points, close reading strategies and guided reading. Intervisitations will take place on a regular basis to share best practices in guided reading. All teachers The team will meet to establish instructional needs based on classroom observations to ensure accessibility for all students and effective teaching strategies. Instructional Coach, Vertical Planning Team, Professional Development Team and ELA Ambassador. Between September 2018 and June 2019, teachers will receive ongoing professional learning on effective ELA instructional strategies. Collect baseline data by October 3  Monitor student proficiency, track student progress, and target instruction using the data from Fountas and Pinnell. Differentiate instruction through flexible small groups and remedial strategies. Classroom teachers of grades K-5 Academic Intervention Services will be provided both during school and in a before school program. AIS teachers will utilize the Leveled Literacy Instruction program with students identified as “in-need” based on F and P assessments. Students identified through F and P Grade level teacher teams will examine and analyze formative and summative assessment data to develop implications for practice within daily balanced literacy instruction for students. Grade level teacher teams 2018 and reassess student performance in February 2018 and May 2019. Between September 2018 and June 2019 Between September 2018 and June 2019 Between September 2018 and June 2019 Teachers, Instructional Coach Administration, AIS teachers Administration, Instructional Coach Teachers will establish and follow protocols to look at student work, identify discrepancies and determine specific instructional strategies to address students’ weaknesses. Student work products and assessments will be evaluated by teacher teams in both horizontal and vertical grade level teams to identify trends in academic language and create instructional plans to support student understanding. Special Supports will be created and implemented for sub-groups such as ENL’s and SWD’s. English Language Arts instruction will be combined with ENL methodologies to better support ELL students. ESL teachers will provide regular training for classroom teachers to share best practices. ESL teachers will also offer support in classroom settings. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Classroom teachers and ESL teachers Between September 2018 and June 2019 Administration, ESL teachers, Instructional Coach How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Regularly scheduled SLT, Annual Title 1 Parent Meeting, and the Parent Association allows for parents to play an active role in the school community and be part of the decision making process. This allows parents to be stakeholders in their students’ progress to improve both academically and socially. Curriculum Conferences and Parent Teacher Conferences will provide opportunities for teachers and parents to collaborate and meet the needs of individual students. Parent Workshops on Common Core Learning Standards and Math/ ELA shifts will enable parents 4  to become familiar with expectations for their children. Parent workshops hosted by ENL teachers will offer strategies to support students who are ELLs. Weekly sessions for parent outreach enables parents to play an active role in their child’s education, as well as, regular communication with parents through the school’s website www.ps255.org and School Messenger. Monthly parent workshops hosted by ENL teachers, the parent coordinator, and instructional coach allow parents to take part in their child's education as well. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Learning and Programming -Professional Learning periods built in to the daily schedule which are comprised of flexible teacher teams 4x per week x 9 months for 50 minute sessions. -Utilizing Monday/Tuesday Professional Learning/Teacher Team Time to plan for instruction that meets the needs of all learners. Monday sessions are 80 minutes for 10 months. Tuesday sessions are 40 minutes for 10 months. This time will be utilized to plan for instruction that meets the needs of all learners and to continue professional learning (school based as well as non-school based) to provide teachers with effective teaching strategies. -Inter-visitation schedule will be created and utilized for teachers to learn from their colleagues. -Coverage of teachers will be provided within the school to support inter-visitation and debrief sessions. -Common Planning embedded into the master schedule for teachers to observe the best practices of their colleagues. -Programmatic change to ensure that guided reading is occurring five days a week in grades K-5. -The ELA block of instruction will take place three mornings a week and math instruction will occur two mornings a week. - Professional Learning sessions were planned based on the trends from the Advance data. Resources for Instruction -Continued implementation of guided reading program and assessment kit from American Reading Company. -Purchase of a fiction guided reading collection for the Guided Reading Book Room. -Orton Gillingham method brought to PS 255. Teachers trained and support implemented. -SmartyAnts software purchased and program implemented in grades K-2. -Purchase of PL website for enriched PL opportunities in best practices for reading instruction. -Purchase of Rethink, an online support system for special education teachers to better support goals, behavior and instruction. Rethink helps teachers decrease problematic behaviors and increase student learning. 5  Personnel -Hire teachers to teach ELL Students and non-ELL immigrant students during the before school program. Per session funds will be used for a before-school AIS program. -AIS reading teachers will work with the lowest performing ELL students in 2nd Grade during a before school program. Data from the End of Year Go Math assessment will be evaluated to identify students eligible for an invitation into the before-school program. -Hire teachers to teach in a before school intensive reading program. -Hire an AIS teacher for AIS instruction during the school day. Parent Connection -Parent workshops hosted by the parent coordinator, with support from Learning Leaders, Instructional Coach and ENL teachers. -Flyer created and dispersed to all families on how to find a leveled book for their child. -Homework support information posted to school website at the request of parent members. Midyear Review Adjustments: -Utilize Imagine Learning software. -Use Mindplay software for AIS. -Hire CPET to support implementation of curriculum and standards. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 20% of identified ELL students will have improved two F and P Reading Levels as evidenced by the F and P Assessment. Students’ ELA performance task data will be analyzed in grade level teams at the end of every unit.   New York City baseline and summative MOSL performance assessment data will be analyzed in horizontal and vertical teacher teams.  Midterm data will be analyzed by February 2018 to assess reading comprehension progress. We expect that the majority of students will have made progress. 6   Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark reading assessments given in October, February and May will be analyzed. The lowest performing third will be given AIS. We expect that the majority of students will have made progress.  Horizontal and vertical teacher teams will analyze student work samples and formative/summative assessment data on an ongoing basis. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.)  Midterm data will be analyzed by February 2019 to assess reading comprehension progress.  Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark reading assessments given in October, February and May will be analyzed. The lowest performing third will be given AIS. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? End of year data from the 2016-2017 3rd grade Go Math assessment showed a grade wide average of 77%. In the 2017-2018 school year, data showed a grade wide average of 71%. In the 2017-2018 school year, 3rd grade Go Math assessment data showed that 59% of students were approaching or below grade level. Observation data collected during classroom observations and district walk-throughs identified continued progress in providing effective strategies for problem solving. Average 4th grade proficiency for the NYS Math assessment in Spring 2016 was 3.13. Average 4th grade proficiency for the NYS Math assessment in Spring 2017 was 3.19. Identified students in math considered to be lowest 15% of 4th grade will begin intervention immediately as of September 2018. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, with support from our staff, fourth grade students who scored in the lowest 15% in math, will increase performance by 22%, from 34% in June 2018 to 56% in June 2019, as evidenced by the Go Math End of Year assessments. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Schedule shared planning time for teacher teams to provide peer-to-peer support as teachers implement instruction aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. This includes inter-visitation and modeling from coaches. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers Collect Administration Teacher Teams will create “units of study” for each chapter. These units will include non-routine math problems and performance tasks. Classroom teachers Utilize the Framework for teaching to identify and replicate highly effective teaching practices and utilize the data collected from the needs analysis survey and personal professional goals to plan professional learning. All teachers Beginning baseline data from Go Math End of Year 3rd Grade Assessment and reassess performance in January 2019 and June 2019. Between September 2018 and June 2019 September, 2018 teachers will receive ongoing professional learning on academic language and Common Core Learning Standard Shifts in Mathematics. Between September 2018 and June 2019 Administration and Instructional Coach Administration and instructional coach will support teachers in using effective instructional strategies to facilitate a variety of lessons that support the Common Core Curriculum through Professional Learning opportunities. Administration, Instructional Coach Student work products and assessments will be evaluated by Grade level teacher teams will examine and analyze formative and summative assessment data to develop implications for practice within daily math instruction for students. Grade level teacher teams 9  Teachers will establish and follow protocols to look at student work, identify discrepancies and determine specific instructional strategies to address students’ weaknesses. Metamorphosis, a professional development company for mathematics, will be hired and utilized to ensure lessons are grounded in the Common Core Standards and that teachers are supported with implementation of the standards within Go Math. Staff developers from Metamorphosis will model effective teaching strategies that support instruction that is Common Core aligned. Ongoing professional learning, both in- house and from Metamorphosis, will provide opportunities for professional growth and learning best practices. Lab sites for each grade level will continue to be utilized, and inter-visitations to that lab site will continue to occur on each grade. Special education liaison, ENL teachers, and service providers will provide professional development to representatives from each grade level to turn-key information that supports SWD’s and ELL’s. Special Supports will be created and implemented for sub-groups such as ELL’s and SWD’s based on analysis of data. All teachers Between September 2018 and June 2019, teachers will receive ongoing professional learning on implementing the CCLS and Data Driven Instruction. All teachers Between September 2018 and June 2019, Students’ Math performance task data will be analyzed in grade level teams at the end of every unit teacher teams in both horizontal and vertical grade level teams to identify trends in academic language and create instructional plans to support student understanding. Special supports will be created and implemented for sub-groups such as ENL’s and SWD’s. Administration and Instructional Coach Administration, NEST Coach, ENL Teachers Go Math!, a standards-based curriculum, will be used. Teachers will continue to utilize the training they received in using the program. Teachers will have opportunities to assess student progress in teacher teams. They will work together to meet grade specific standards in Mathematics in the collection of baseline data, mid chapter checkpoints, end of chapter assessments and performance tasks. All teachers Between Administration September 2018 and June 2019 Regularly scheduled SLT, Annual Title 1 Parent Meeting and PA allows for parents to play an active role in the school community and be part of the decision making process. This allows parents to be stakeholders in their students’ progress to Parents and Guardians Between September 2018 and June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator, Instructional Coach, Teachers 0 improve performance on math assessments. Curriculum Conferences and Parent Teacher Conferences will provide opportunities for teachers and parents to collaborate and meet the needs of individual students. Parent Workshops on Common Core Learning Standards and math/ ELA shifts that will enable parents to become familiar with expectations for their children. Parent workshops hosted by ENL teachers will offer strategies to support students who are ELL'S. Weekly sessions for parent outreach enables parents to play and active role in their child(ren)’s education. Regular communication with parents through the school’s website www.ps255.org and School Messenger. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Regularly scheduled SLT, Annual Title 1 Parent Meeting, PA allows for parents to play an active role in the school community and be part of the decision making process. This allows parents to be stakeholders in their students’ progress. Curriculum Conferences and Parent Teacher Conferences will provide opportunities for teachers and parents to collaborate and meet the needs of individual students. Parent Workshops on Common Core Learning Standards and math/ ELA shifts that will enable parents to become familiar with expectations for their children. Parent workshops hosted by ENL teachers will offer strategies to support students who are ELL'S. Weekly sessions for parent outreach enables parents to play and active role in their child(ren)’s education, as well as regular communication with parents through the school’s website www.ps255.org and School Messenger. Administration, Parent Coordinator, ENL Teachers, Instructional and NEST Coach will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Utilize the Go Math! Program with students to ensure the math curriculum is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. -Two mornings per week will be scheduled as instructional time for mathematics. -AIS program for mathematics will be given during the day and before school. Per session funding will be available for the before school program. Data from the End of Year Go Math assessment will be evaluated to see who will be invited to be a part of the before school program. -Continue to provide professional development focusing on the components of the Go Math! Program available to support the teachers and students in the instruction and learning of mathematics. Professional Development periods built in to the daily schedule. 1  -Utilizing Monday/Tuesday Professional Learning/Teacher Team Time to plan for instruction that meets the needs of all learners. -Common planning time for teachers will be built into the master schedule. -Mathletics program used consistently across grades K-5. Schoolwide recognition celebrations implemented. -Homework support information posted to school website at the request of parent members. -Purchase of PL website for enriched PL opportunities in best practices for mathematics instruction. -Purchase of Rethink, an online support system for special education teachers to better support goals, behavior and instruction. Rethink helps teachers decrease problematic behaviors and increase student learning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, Middle of Year Go Math data will show that 50% of identified students will have made gains of 11% as evidenced by the Go Math Midyear assessment. -Midterm Middle of Year (MOY) Go Math assessments will given. Data will be analyzed in teacher teams. -By February 2019, the administration will monitor and compare whole school Go Math data to measure if student scores are increasing or decreasing as a result of goal related activities to determine if the school is on course to meet the annual goal. -Item Analysis data from each chapter test will be collected and analyzed in grade level teams both horizontally and vertically to identify trends and create instructional plans. -Utilize the Framework for teaching to identify and replicate highly effective teaching practices and utilize the data collected from the needs analysis survey and personal professional goals to plan professional development. -Debrief sessions will be held to ensure implementation is effective. -Subgroups such as ELL’s and SWD’s will be supported by their service providers to ensure their needs are met as well. -Student work products and assessments will be evaluated in both horizontal and vertical teacher teams to identify that the norms created for grading procedures are utilized consistently. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Midterm Middle of Year (MOY) Go Math assessments will be given. Data will be analyzed in teacher teams. Performance Task data will be analyzed in teacher teams. 2  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. End of Year 2016-2017 2nd Grade F & P data shows the lowest 10% of second graders in reading. Of the 2nd graders, 46% scored a level 1 or 2 on the EOY F and P assessment. End of Year 2017-2018 2nd Grade F & P data shows the lowest 15% of second graders in reading. Of the 2nd graders, 46% scored a level 1 or 2 on the EOY F and P assessment. End of Year 2016-2017 MOSL selection data from 2nd grade indicated a need for improvement in the language standards. The overall EOY average proficiency was 87.9%. End of Year 2017-2018 MOSL selection data from 2nd grade indicated a continued need for improvement in the language standards. The overall EOY average proficiency was 89%. Performance on ELA tasks that show students had difficulty with complex texts as reflected in the Common Core Learning Standards. Evidence gathered in administrative and Superintendent walk-throughs identified progress in using the new CCLS aligned curriculum. Teachers need to continue to work on modifying the curriculum to meet the needs of all students and ensure cohesion between the classrooms. Trends in student performance show that the majority of students need more support in close reading strategies and use of academic vocabulary. -Average 3rd grade proficiency on the NYS ELA assessment in Spring 2016 was 2.89. Average 3rd grade proficiency on the NYS ELA assessment in Spring 2017 was 2.84. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Collaborative teachers will engage in classroom intervisitation to model best practices of effective pedagogy and student engagement. As a result, by June 2019, 80% of the lowest 15% of third graders will increase at least two reading levels as evidenced by the Fountas and Pinnell 2nd Grade Reading End of Year Assessment to the Fountas and Pinnell 3rd Grade Reading End of Year Assessment. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Utilize a standards-based curriculum that replicates the strategies for reading complex texts in grades K-2, to make a smoother transition for students in Grades 3. Curriculum will reflect age appropriate and authentic texts for students and be embedded in the Common Core Learning Standards. This curriculum will be modeled in intervisitations. Between September 2018 and June 2019 All students, with modifications and accommodations for various subgroups. Administration Teachers will receive ongoing professional learning on using the new curriculum and close reading strategies. Between October 2018 and June 2019, teachers will meet in teacher teams to create modifications for English as a New Language (ENL), Students With Disabilities (SWD) and Enriched learners to support the needs of all students. Classroom teachers will use a Common Core aligned curriculum. Curriculum maps using the curriculum will be created by teacher teams. Provide multiple entry points to help all students achieve academic success. Teachers will be given continuous professional learning on UDL, multiple entry points, close reading strategies, guided reading equity and culturally responsive educational systems and teaching practices. Teachers will then participate in intervisitations to share best practices. Teachers will receive ongoing professional learning on effective ELA instructional strategies. All teachers Between September 2018 and June 2019 Instructional Coach, Vertical Planning Team, Professional Development Team and ELA Ambassador. 5  Teachers will utilize protocols for inter-visitations to monitor student growth in ELA and support best practices. The team will meet to establish instructional needs based on classroom observations to ensure accessibility for all students and effective teaching strategies. Monitor student proficiency, track student progress, and target instruction using the data from Fountas and Pinnell. Differentiate instruction through flexible small groups and remedial strategies. Classroom teachers Between September 2018 and June 2019 Teachers, Instructional Coach In depth data analysis in teacher teams and during grade level meetings. Academic Intervention Services will be provided both during school and in a before school program. AIS teachers will utilize the Leveled Literacy Instruction program with students identified as “in-need” on F and P assessments. Identified Students Grade level teacher teams will examine and analyze formative and summative assessment data to develop implications for practice within daily balanced literacy instruction for students. Grade level teacher teams Between September 2018 and June 2019 Between September 2018 and June 2019 Administration, AIS teachers Administration, Instructional Coach Teachers will establish and follow protocols to look at student work, identify discrepancies and determine specific instructional strategies to address students’ weaknesses. Student work products and assessments will be evaluated by teacher teams in both horizontal and vertical grade level teams to identify trends in academic language and create instructional plans to support student understanding.(Special Supports will be created and implemented for sub-groups such as ENL’s and SWD’s) -Both leveled literacy instruction and indirect instruction will be provided by an AIS teacher throughout the day. AIS Teacher 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administration Between September 2018 and June 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 6  Regularly scheduled SLT, Annual Title 1 Parent Meeting, PA allows for parents to play an active role in the school community and be part of the decision making process. This allows parents to be stakeholders in their students’ progress to improve performance on ELA assessments. Curriculum Conferences and Parent Teacher Conferences will provide opportunities for teachers and parents to collaborate and meet the needs of individual students. Parent Workshops on Common Core Learning Standards and Math/ ELA shifts that will enable parents to become familiar with expectations for their children. Parent workshops hosted by ENL teachers will offer strategies to support students who are ELL'S. Weekly sessions for parent outreach enables parents to play an active role in their child(ren)’s education. Regular communication with parents through the school’s website www.ps255.org and School Messenger. Administration, Instructional Coach, and Parent Coordinator will take part in and oversee the activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Purchase and use of a new program, ‘Mindplay’, providing indirect AIS instruction for grades 3-5 to be used both during the school day and in a before-school program. -Purchase and use of Wordly Wise, a program for grades K-5, working to improve their vocabulary skills throughout the school day. -Purchase and use of Rally online to assess students twice a year. -Purchase of test preparation software, iReady, to be used for additional reinforcement in afterschool. -Support educator excellence in teachers and school leaders through professional learning periods built in to the daily schedule which are comprised of flexible teacher teams 4x per week x 9 months for 50 minute sessions. -Utilizing Monday/Tuesday Professional Learning/Teacher Team Time to plan for instruction that meets the needs of all learners. Monday sessions are 80 minutes for 10 months. Tuesday sessions are 40 minutes for 10 months. This time will be utilized to plan for instruction that meets the needs of all learners and continue professional learning (school based as well as non-school based) to provide teachers with effective teaching strategies. -Intervisitation schedule will be created and utilized for teachers to learn best practices of effective pedagogy and student engagement from their colleagues. -Coverage of teachers will be provided within the school to support inter-visitation and debrief sessions. -Parent workshops hosted by the parent coordinator, with support from Learning Leaders, Instructional Coach and ENL teachers. 7  -Hire an AIS teacher for AIS instruction during the school day. -Use per session funds to hire AIS reading teachers to work with lowest performing students during a before school reading program. -Use per session funds to hire teachers to teach ELL Students and non-ELL immigrant students during the before school program. -Common Planning embedded into the master schedule for teachers to observe the best practices of their colleagues. -Programmatic change to ensure that guided reading is occurring five days a week in grades K-5. -Flyer created and dispersed to all families on how to find a leveled book for their child. -Homework support information posted to school website at the request of parent members. -Purchase of PL website for enriched PL opportunities in best practices for reading instruction. -Purchase of Rethink, an online support system for special education teachers to better support goals, behavior and instruction. Rethink helps teachers decrease problematic behaviors and increase student learning. This will help ensure that there are supports and services in place for all students to maximize inclusion in all classrooms. Midyear Review Adjustments: -Utilize Imagine Learning software. -Use Mindplay software for AIS. -Hire CPET to support implementation of curriculum and standards. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, using direct and indirect literacy instruction, 5% of 4th and 5th grade students who scored a level 2 on the state ELA exam, will increase performance from a level 2 to a level 3 or above, as measured by a Rally Rehearsal school-based assessment.  By the end of February 2019, the administration will monitor and compare whole school ELA performance task data to measure if student scores are increasing or decreasing as a result of goal related activities to determine if the school is on a course to meet the annual goal. Students’ ELA performance task data will be analyzed in grade level teams at the end of every unit.   New York City baseline and summative MOSL performance assessment data will be analyzed in horizontal and vertical teacher teams.  Midterm data will be analyzed by February 2019 to assess reading comprehension progress. 8   Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark reading assessments given in October, February and May will be analyzed. The lowest performing third will be given AIS.  Horizontal and vertical teacher teams will analyze student work samples and formative/summative assessment data on an ongoing basis. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By February 2019, using direct and indirect literacy instruction, 5% of 4th and 5th grade students who scored a level 2 on the state ELA exam, will increase performance from a level 2 to a level 3 or above, as measured by a Rally Rehearsal school-based assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In reflecting on our 2017-2018 State ELA results, students made less progress from level 2 to level 3 (or above) then from level 1 to level 2 and level 3 to level 4. There were 82 out of 280 grade 4 and grade 5 students who scored a Level 2 on the 2017-2018 State ELA exam. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of effective school leadership and use of resources, by June 2019, using direct and indirect literacy instruction, 10% of 4th and 5th grade students who scored a level 2 on the state ELA exam, will increase performance from a level 2 to a level 3 or above, as measured by student performance on a beginning of year (BOY) Rally Rehearsal school-based assessment to an end of year (EOY) Rally Rehearsal school-based assessment. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Utilize a standards based curriculum that replicates the strategies for reading complex texts in grades K-2. Curriculum will reflect age appropriate and authentic texts for students according to the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers will also utilize an intensive guided reading program. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administration Teachers will receive ongoing professional learning on close reading strategies and using the new curriculum. Teachers will meet in teacher teams to create modifications for English as a New Language (ENL), Students With Disabilities (SWD) and Enriched learners to support the needs of all students. Classroom teachers will use a Common Core aligned curriculum. Curriculum maps using the curriculum will be created by teacher teams. Provide multiple entry points to help all students achieve academic success. Teachers will be given continuous professional development on UDL, multiple entry points, close reading strategies and guided reading. Intervisitations will take place on a regular basis to share best practices in guided reading. The team will meet to establish instructional needs based on classroom observations to ensure accessibility for all students and effective teaching strategies. Monitor student proficiency, track student progress, and target instruction using the data from Fountas and Pinnell, Mindplay Software and Rally online assessments. Differentiate instruction through flexible small groups and remedial strategies. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Instructional Coach, Vertical Planning Team, Professional Development Team and ELA Ambassador. Students and Teachers October 2018-June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Instructional Coach Academic Intervention Services will be provided both during school and in a before school program. AIS teacher will utilize the Leveled Literacy Instruction program and Mindplay program. Families of students Spring 2019 AIS teacher, Administration Grade level teacher teams will examine and analyze formative and summative assessment data to develop implications for practice within daily balanced literacy instruction for students. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Instructional Coach 1 Teachers will establish and follow protocols to look at student work, identify discrepancies and determine specific instructional strategies to address students’ weaknesses. Student work products and assessments will be evaluated by teacher teams in both horizontal and vertical grade level teams to identify trends in academic language and create instructional plans to support student understanding. Special Supports will be created and implemented for sub-groups such as ENL’s and SWD’s. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Regularly scheduled SLT, Annual Title 1 Parent Meeting, PA allows for parents to play an active role in the school community and be part of the decision making process. This allows parents to be stakeholders in their students’ progress to improve performance on ELA assessments. Curriculum Conferences and Parent Teacher Conferences will provide opportunities for teachers and parents to collaborate and meet the needs of individual students. Parent Workshops on Common Core Learning Standards and Math/ ELA shifts that will enable parents to become familiar with expectations for their children. Weekly sessions for parent outreach enables parents to play an active role in their child(ren)’s education. Regular communication with parents through the school’s website www.ps255.org and School Messenger. Administration, Instructional Coach, and Parent Coordinator will take part in and oversee the activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Support educator excellence in teachers and school leaders through professional learning periods built in to the daily schedule which are comprised of flexible teacher teams 4x per week x 9 months for 50 minute sessions. -Utilizing Monday/Tuesday Professional Learning/Teacher Team Time to plan for instruction that meets the needs of all learners. Monday sessions are 80 minutes for 10 months. Tuesday sessions are 40 minutes for 10 months. This time will be utilized to plan for instruction that meets the needs of all learners and continue professional learning (school based as well as non-school based) to provide teachers with effective teaching strategies. -Purchase and use of myOn, an online reading program and library of books. -Intervisitation schedule will be created and utilized for teachers to learn best practices of effective pedagogy and student engagement from their colleagues. -Coverage of teachers will be provided within the school to support inter-visitation and debrief sessions. -Parent workshops hosted by the parent coordinator, with support from Learning Leaders, Instructional Coach and ENL teachers. 2  -Hire an AIS teacher for AIS instruction during the school day. -Use per session funds to hire AIS reading teachers to work with lowest performing students in 3rd Grade during a before school reading program. -Use per session funds to hire teachers to teach ELL Students and non-ELL immigrant students during the before school program. -Common Planning embedded into the master schedule for teachers to observe the best practices of their colleagues. -Programmatic change to ensure that guided reading is occurring five days a week in grades K-5. -Flyer created and dispersed to all families on how to find a leveled book for their child. -Homework support information posted to school website at the request of parent members. -SmartyAnts software purchased and program implemented in grades K-2. -Purchase of the Orton Gillingham method. Teachers trained and support implemented. -Purchase of PL website for enriched PL opportunities in best practices for reading instruction. -Purchase of Rethink, an online support system for special education teachers to better support goals, behavior and instruction. Rethink helps teachers decrease problematic behaviors and increase student learning. This will help ensure that there are supports and services in place for all students to maximize inclusion in all classrooms. Midyear Review Adjustments: -Utilize Imagine Learning software. -Use Mindplay software for AIS. -Hire CPET to support implementation of curriculum and standards. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, using direct and indirect literacy instruction, 5% of 4th and 5th grade students who scored a level 2 on the state ELA exam, will increase performance from a level 2 to a level 3 or above, as measured by student performance on a beginning of year (BOY) Rally Rehearsal school-based assessment to a middle of year (MOY) Rally Rehearsal school-based assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 3  Teachers will administer the middle of year (MOY) Rally Rehearsal school-based assessment and analyze data in teacher teams. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data from Parent Workshops from the 2016-2017 school year shows an average attendance of 23 attendees per workshop. Data from Parent Workshops from the 2017-2018 school year shows an average attendance of 27 attendees per workshop. As of June 2017, about 500 parents had signed up for school messenger via email. As of September 2017, 570 parents had signed up for school messenger via email. Parent survey data from a 2018 survey (Survey Monkey) reveals that 47% of participants have attended a parent workshop at P.S. 255. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By strengthening our strong family-community ties, we will increase parent engagement at our school's parent workshops. By June 2019, attendance will increase by 3% as evidenced by attendance data from 2018-2019 school year compared to 2017-2018 school year. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School Messenger announcements will be made via email in addition to telephone. Parent and families Presentation at the parent association meeting to introduce school resources such as the school wide PBIS system. Parents and family members will learn more about brag tags and their benefits. Families of students September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Administration Parent Coordinator, Administration Teachers who use apps, such as "Remind" will use that media to remind parents about parent workshops and events in addition to classroom announcements. Teachers, Parents and Families October 2018 PA Meeting Teachers, Instructional Coach, Parent Coordinator, Administration Parents and Families November 2018 PA Meeting Parent Coordinator, Instructional Coach, Administration A review of when the best time to schedule parent workshops will take place. A survey will be given to parents as to when the best time for parent workshops is and what topics they feel would best support their needs. Link to Parent Workshops on our school site www.ps255.org Parent Workshops – Common Core Learning Standards/Testing/Go Math/ELL Supports Parents and Families Parents and Families September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator Teachers, ENL Teachers, Instructional Coach, Parent Coordinator, Administration Teachers, Guidance Counselors Parent Coordinator, Administration Parent Workshops will be provided on social and emotional growth. Teachers will participate in professional learning to support students in these areas as well. Teachers, Parents and Families September 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 6  National Dance Institute, Education in Dance, Puppetry in Practice, Construction Kids, Brooklyn Public Library, Brooklyn College, St. Joseph's College, Madison High School, Cunningham Junior High School, Penny Harvest, Make-A-Wish Foundation, Relay for Life Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Continue contract with eChalk for school website www.ps255.org. -Use of survey to poll parents as per what days/times would be best for parent workshops, as well as parent workshop topics. -Schedule of parent workshops during family engagement time. -Pairing PTA meetings with Parent Workshops. -Creating a “family” parent workshop where students work with parents to learn about academic growth as well as social/emotional growth. -Creation of a flyer to families reminding them of our website. -Teachers will share information about upcoming workshops on homework and through apps such as Remind. Midyear Review Adjustments: Offer parent workshops before dismissal, as opposed to after arrival. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, attendance at parent workshops will increase by 1%, as evidenced by attendance sheets from parent workshops. -A mid year review will occur in February to track progress and implement new workshops as necessary. -By the end of February 2019, the administration will monitor and compare attendance data from parental workshops from 2017-2018 school year to 2018-2019 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance data at parent workshops. A second survey will be sent out in the winter of 2019 to track input and progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Fountas and PinnellBOY, MOY and EOYdata, State assessment data, various forms of formative and summative assessment data. Baseline BOY, MOYand EOYassessment data, State assessment data, various forms of formative and summativeassessment data. State assessment data, formative and summativeclassroom assessment data. Various formative and summativeassessment data. Classroom observations, parent communication Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Comprehension, fluency, critical thinking, test taking skills, providing evidence in argument when expressing points of view Solving word problems, multi-step problems, explanation of thinking, justification of answers Performance- conducting experiments Hypothesis- conclusion Integrated in ELAinstruction Small group, one-to-one and push-in During the school day and after school Small group, one-to-one and push-in During the school day and after school Small group work After school hours Small group and one-to-one During the school day Crisis intervention counseling Small group and one-to-one During the school day 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently, we have 74 students who are considered to be a Student in Temporary Housing. There are 2 students who live in a shelter and 72 that are "doubled-up". 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students who are identified as STH receive a wide variety of services at PS 255. Each student is given a backpack with our school logo on it. In this backpack there is a sweat suit with our school logo and a t-shirt. Students also receive gifts during the holidays. STH receive school supplies regularly, such as notebooks, folders and pencils. They are given lunchboxes as well. Students can receive at-risk counseling and Academic Intervention Services (AIS) if needed. In addition, we pay for school trips for these students. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS N/A 0 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  In order to attract highly qualified teachers, student teachers and student observers are welcomed and trained in our school. We have an in-house liaison for student teachers.  To retain our highly qualified teachers we provide ongoing professional learning, both in house as well as out.  Various opportunities to turnkey and engage in intervisitation with coach and lead teachers, in order to  expand teacher’s capacity and meet their individual needs. In order to nurture highly qualified teachers, time will be allotted for collaboration in an effort to foster a professional learning community. Teacher teams are created by grade, subject and subgroup.  Teachers' goals are analyzed in order to provide targeted professional learning based on teacher needs. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  Professional Development Team: Identify instructional areas of need and target professional learning to support instruction  Professional learning time integrated throughout daily schedules to support teachers  Outside staff development, including but not limited to, Metamorphosis, NEST, Playworks, Rethink, etc.  Created Teachps255.com: On-line resource library to support teachers with instructional needs  Teachers attending professional learning are responsible for turn-keying the presented information to teachers.  Vertical and Horizontal Team Meetings: Ensure alignment of instructional targets across all grade levels  Extended an Instructional Coach position to ensure that we are providing a rigorous education aligned to the Common Core.  New teachers are mentored by highly qualified individuals to relay clear expectations and support rigorous instruction. Part 3: TA Schools Only 2  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.).  Kindergarten attend PD sessions addressing Common Core Learning Standards and Shifts in ELA and Math and understanding the Pre_K CCLS Expectations.  Kindergarten teachers engage in curriculum planning to ensure skills and strategies required in Kindergarten are scaffolded properly.  Parent Involvement activities for Pre-K include Kindergarten and 1st grade as well.  End of the year meet and greet for Pre K parents to smooth the transition to Kindergarten. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Vertical Team, Inquiry Team, and Professional Development Team are included in all decision making for assessments. PD Team creates a PL plan focusing on Data Driven Instruction to ensure teachers are utilizing assessment data to target student needs. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount 3  each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 601,077.00 78,893.00 32,077.00 11,863.00 5,238,120.00 X X X X X Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A,5B,5C, 5D,5E 5A,5B,5C 5A,5B,5C 5A,5E 5A, 5B, 5C,5D,5E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 4   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S 255 Barbara Reing School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Our school will support parents and families of Title I students by: 6  · providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; · providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; · fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; · providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; · sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; · providing professional learning opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will: · actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluate the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; · engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; · ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; · support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; · maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office; · conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; · provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESEA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; · host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 7  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA); · schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; · translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; · conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement · holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; · hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; · encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; · supporting or hosting Family Night events; · encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; · providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ·developing a web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; · providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand; School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 255, The Barbara Reing School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 8  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 9  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) Title I requirement for Elementary Secondary Education Act (ESEA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 0  ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 1  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Funding by Title III helps provide intensive small group ENL/content area instructional programs, on-going professional development for teachers and programs that promote strong parental involvement. Home languages are supported by providing translations and interpretations of all parental interactions, including all written documents as well as parental visitations whether they are in person or by telephone. In order to focus on specific needs of our significant ELL population, Title III funding supplements before school and after school programs that have been designed for ELLs in grades K-5. The program is supported by CR PART 154 with supplementary services. All ELL students are invited to attend. Foundational skills are offered to new ELLs and at-risk ELLs. Quantitative and qualitative data are analyzed to support the program rationale. Thus, the program consists of before and after school programs. The before school program teacher team, consisting of 7 ENL and Common Branch teachers, works with small groups of ELL students building literary skills which include integrated phonics, grammar, comprehension, vocabulary building, and writing. Classes meet for one hour before the regular school begins five days a week. In the after school academic intervention in Math, Reading, Science, ENL, and Test-Taking Skills 7 licensed content area teachers coupled with licensed ENL teachers teach all ELLs. The topics/content areas covered during the Title III Plan include math, reading, and science. There are 210 ELLs in the program for the year. The program is broken up in the following way to ensure that we meet the needs of all the students: Math and Reading, Science, and Test Taking Skills. Math and Reading after school runs on Wednesdays and Thursdays for two hours from 2:45 to 4:45 p.m. This program starts in the beginning of October, 2018 until commencement of standardized testing . There are grade 3, grade 4, and grade 5 classes. All ELL students receive instruction from teachers using ENL methodology. All ELLs are invited to participate. Parents are notified of these programs by letters that are written in English with translations that are available in parents' home languages. Our school ensures that our ELL students reach their maximum potential in English language acquisition. Qualitative and quantitative data shows that currently, of the 201 ELLs, 72 are at the entering/emerging level, and 129 are at the transitioning/commanding level. We have 144 students who are at the commanding level. All classes and after school sessions are taught in English with support for the students' native language provided by bilingual dictionaries, books, and online resources. The classes are conducted by ENL pedagogues and licensed teachers using ENL methodology. ENL strategies are implemented in the Title III Program in order to meet the needs of our ELLs. The methods of instruction used by teachers include the sheltered approach, scaffolding, modeling, TPR (Total Physical Response), the Natural Approach, and the Holistic Experience Approach. These are instructional models developed to meet the academic needs of ENL students in the content areas and assist ELLs in acquiring grade-appropriate language skills necessary for academic success. All materials used in our Title III program are supplemental and distinct from those used for daily instruction. 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The following materials are used to support ELLs during the after-school academic programs: • New York Progress, by Sadlier (purchased with TLFSF); • Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT, test prep books by Attanasio & Associates, Inc. – NYSESLAT Test Prep Grades K-5 (purchased with TITLE III funds); • Bilingual Dictionaries by Hippocrene Books, Inc. – to be used by students during all after-school programs as needed (purchased with TLFSF); • ELL K-5 Classroom Library - to be used by students during all after-school programs as needed (purchased with TLFSF). As a conceptually consolidated school, other funding sources will be combined with Title III funds to cover our after-school Title III Program. Notification letters with translations available in parents' preferred languages are sent home to inform families about available programs and to invite students to attend. Accurate records of correspondences and attendance are maintained by program coordinators. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional learning (PL) is an important key to the success of our academic program. To address this need, our school offers a comprehensive PL schedule in ENL methodology for all teachers. Teachers participate in monthly staff development activities, grade conferences and faculty meetings designed to improve their delivery of instruction. Our professional learning sessions empower teachers with the latest knowledge and tools used in language acquisition and methodologies. PLs are provided to teachers at no cost to the Title III program. They are embedded into the school PL calendar during the school day. Additional support is provided to the teachers that are working in the Title III program by our Regional Support Department. Our school also provides PL to the fifth grade teachers in making sure that their students, especially the ELLs, understand the different types of routines and environments they will be exposed to in the middle school as compared to elementary school. The fifth grade teachers understand that the students need to be taught the academic vocabulary they may encounter in the middle school, as well as necessary life skills. At the PL session, teachers are provided with suggestions and recommendations on how to assist ELLs as they transition from elementary to middle school. Assistance is also given to fifth grade teachers in completing middle school applications. The school guidance counselor, the parent coordinator, and ENL teachers help the teachers ensure that the parents understand the application process and their options.Certified ENL teachers will conduct 7 ½ hours (general education) and 10 hours (special education) of state-mandated ENL staff development for the school faculty. ENL materials and resources are provided to those classroom teachers who have ELLs. All teachers also have the opportunity to attend off site ongoing workshops and sessions facilitated by the Department of English Language Learners which are advertised weekly in the ENL Opportunity newsletter, as well as workshops offered by the ELL support at our Network. The PL sessions will cover but are not limited to the following list of topics: • ELL Support - October, 2018 4  Part C: Professional Development • Teaching Reading and Writing using ESL Methodologies – November, 2018 • Using Classroom Glossaries and Dictionaries – December, 2018 • Differentiating Instruction for ELLs – January, 2019 • Scaffolding Language and Learning – February, 2019 • Content Area Instruction and Assessment for ELLs – March, 2019 • Test-Taking Strategies - April, 2019 These sessions will be held during the first school period which has been reserved for school-wide professional learning. Additional sessions will be held at various times in accordance with teachers' schedules. Agendas and attendance records are kept on file with the school's staff developer, as well as with the ENL teachers. These are maintained as evidence of meeting the requirements. During our Professional Learning sessions, trends are identified and discussed in teacher teams, both horizontally (on the same grade level) and vertically (across the grades) which provides our staff with the support needed to assist ELLs as they transition from one school level to another. Teachers are provided with a form to identify student weaknesses and strengths and to share best practices which will foment student improvement. Our School Secretaries receive Professional Learning on Election Day. Our school Parent Coordinator attends an ELL Professional Learning session that is provided by the Department of Education on an annual basis. Teachers attend in-house PLs as well as PLs conducted by the DOE. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our parent coordinator, in collaboration with ENL teachers, stress the importance of parent involvement and provide all available resources on how parents can help their children achieve both academic success and improve language proficiency in English. It is also important that parents understand the mandates regarding instruction, testing and materials that affect our ELL population. Parents receive information about on-line homework resources, homework help line “Dial-A-Teacher” available in many languages, as well as assistance at our local library. Other services provided to ELL parents include translations and interpretations at all Parent Association meetings and workshops by parents and staff members. The rationale for our parent workshops is based on needs analysis from parental feedback. All parent meetings' expenses are paid with TLFSF funds. Our records for parent workshops are maintained by parent coordinator and ENL teachers. These include agendas, attendance sheets, materials presented, and invitations in parents' preferred languages. Our school partners with Community Based Organizations. The parent coordinator ensures that our ELL parents receive timely notifications about free ENL classes given at libraries and other schools in the district. An annual survey is sent to all parents in our school to determine areas of concern. A series of ENL content area workshops, specifically designed for parents of ELLs, are conducted to better inform them about content area curricula and the exams their children must take. Workshops also focus on educating the parents about school policies, as well as school “survival skills”. 2018-2019 Parent Workshop Schedule: 5  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Topic Date Time P/D provider School survival skills:Strategies for Navigating 10/2018 8:30 - 9:45 2 ENL teachers and parent School Structures. coordinator Reading and Literacy Connection: Strategies 11/2018 8:30 – 9:45 2 ENL teachers and the parent for success on the NYSESLAT and ELA tests. coordinator Math: Using manipulatives/concrete examples 1/2018 8:30 – 9:45 2 ENL teachers, to solve word problems. and the parent coordinator Arts and Writing: Ideas for enhancing artistic 2/2019 8:30 – 9:45 2 ENL teachers, abilities in children. and the parent coordinator Test Prep: What to expect and how parents can 3/2019 8:30 – 9:45 2 ENL support student success on tests. teachers and the parent coordinator Our parent coordinator also ensures that the New York City Department of Education brochures that addresses parental rights, as well as other resources, are available to parents. Translation and/or interpretation of all school correspondence is also made available. Our Parent Coordinator strives to make our ELL parents feel comfortable in coming to her for assistance in navigating the New York City public school system. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. 6 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 22 School Name Barbara Reing Borough Brooklyn School Number 255 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Kelly McCann Coach Ana Mandelbaum ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Seshenny Ni Amen, Naira Vagany Teacher/Subject Area Danielle Eldin, ELA/Com. Branc Teacher/Subject Area Fran Levine, Math Ambassador Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Julia Bove Assistant Principal Susan Ehrlich and Iris Nikas Coach type here School Counselor Christine Silecchia Parent Olga Obertos, PA Co-President Parent Coordinator Beth Rocco Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) Kimberly Vallejo, Testing Coor C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 4 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 5 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 8  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 918 Total number of ELLs 210 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 22.88% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses a variety of tools to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. These assessment tools include the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, and Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment Program. Fountas and Pinnell scores provide teachers with a students’ independent and instructional reading levels. These are used to differentiate instruction and provide on-level texts for each student. Students are tested at a minimum of three times a year and their data is collected by administration. Students who are reading below level are invited to a before school reading program. The ELL's in our school fall into a wide range of literacy levels, as follows: In Kindergarten - Below A to E In 1st Grade - A to M In 2nd Grade - A to Q 9  In 3rd Grade - A to R In 4th Grade - G to T In 5th Grade - D to W Teacher-generated formative assessments are used regularly in all subjects and are aligned with the Common Core Standards. This data also assists teachers with student group placement. It provides an understanding of individual students' needs, their levels of proficiency, and their strengths and weaknesses. This data supports the generation of our school's instructional plan by identifying at-risk students early and providing scaffolding and support which address students' needs. This includes flexible grouping, AIS instruction, RTI intervention, and extra-curricular programs which help anchor classroom instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In order to support the effort to formally assess the ELL population and to guide instructional planning, the following structures are in place. At the start of the school year, teachers use NYSESLAT scores in order to group students for differentiated instruction. Utilizing collaboration with classroom teachers, ENL instructors are able to develop student vocabulary and provide small group as well as individualized instruction for ELLs who are not yet meeting the grade level standards. There are weekly meetings, in which teachers meet by grade level in order to work on instructional planning. There are also monthly meetings for curriculum mapping. During these meetings, teachers use formative and informative assessments to drive instructional planning. ENL teachers also generate assessments to ensure that the ELL population is meeting grade level expectations. These structures contribute to support ELLs' specific instructional plan. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our program for ELLs is evaluated in a variety of ways. Foremost are the results of the NYSESLAT exam and the number of students exiting the program. This is in addition to the number of ELLs moving from one proficiency level to the next. Next, are the results of state and city exams, such as the ELA, Math, Science, and MOSL. There are also the results from individual teacher generated assessments including informal tasks, such as oral and written reports and class projects. These evaluations determine areas of weakness and help teachers tailor teaching methods and strategies to meet the needs of our students. Complying with a task, making progress in all four modalities, and finally scoring proficient on the NYSESLAT are all indicators of the success of our program. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? ENL instructors have a variety of structures in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered. These include our RTI program, ENL before and after school enrichment and test preparation programs, skill specific lessons, strategy development lessons, and content area instruction. Based on the results of the summative data that has been collected, teachers are able to identify the skills and strategies that need to be developed. During before and after school enrichment programs, while utilizing the content of the curriculum, ENL instructors focus teaching to areas of need. The content of the classroom is reinforced during the program's instruction, in addition to rich language development. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Students are selected from a list of those who scored below specified levels of performance on the annual English language proficiency assessment. Our school then implements one-on-one and small group instruction to reach these at-risk students. In addition to collaboration with the classroom teacher, frequent assessments, aligned with the Common Core Standards, are administered to guide instruction for ELLs and ensure that the students' needs are being met. These results determine if the student needs additional support or can transition back to the core group. As emphasis is placed on vocabulary development, culturally appropriate texts are incorporated into instruction whenever possible in order to inspire and accelerate students' acquisition of necessary literary skills. ELL students are discussed bi weekly at Inquiry Team meetings. Data is obtained from classroom teachers on current levels of understanding and progress. This data is compiled from classroom tests, frequent formative assessments, teacher observation and classroom work. Data is analyzed for common trends and a language plan focused on language and literacy is then formed and implemented. Students are provided with small group instruction by the classroom teacher and/or out of classroom 0  service providers. Frequent check-ins are performed to monitor progress by the teacher and ENL teacher and then reported back to the Inquiry team. If more support is needed then Tier 2 strategies are implemented. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Outcome assessments, such as the NYSELAT, data are used to evaluate and inform our ELL program. According to the results obtained from RLAT, the data patterns across proficiency levels reveal that students first become proficient in Listening and Speaking while Reading and Writing are acquired at a later and slower rate. Students in the early years, Kindergarten, First, and Second grades, become proficient quickly in Listening and Speaking. Proficiency in Reading and Writing corresponds to age and grade levels. In the upper grades, Third, Fourth, and Fifth grades, proficiency is determined by prior educational experience and the level of literacy in the native language. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Outcome assessment data is disseminated to all members of the instructional team in order to make adjustments to the programs. Throughout the school year, classroom and content area teachers, collaborate with ENL instructors to share the findings of formal and informal assessments. Likewise, ENL instructors share their assessments in speaking, listening, reading, and writing with the classroom teachers. This information is disseminated during both weekly grade meetings and monthly curriculum mapping meetings. These collaborations allow classroom teachers to make adjustments in student grouping to better meet the needs of every learner. In addition to the collaboration between ENL and classroom teachers, ENL instructors also have meetings to discuss outcome assessments to make adjustments for the program. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our ELL students receive freestanding and integrated ENL, depending on their level. All ELLs are taught by licensed, certified ENL teachers. ENL-entitled students (including special education students identified as ELLs) are served in the push-in/pull-out models. In the push-in model, the ENL teacher works with ELLs in collaboration with general education classroom teachers to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. There is a common preparation time between the two teachers and/or prior collaborative lesson planning. In the pull-out model, the ELLs spend the majority of their session in all-English content instruction but are brought together from various classes for English acquisition-focused instruction given by an ENL certified teacher. All students participating in the above models receive instruction based on their NYSITELL or NYSESLAT scores. Our ELL students are given instruction in heterogeneous groups by grade. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 1  As CR Part 154 mandates, all ELLs receive appropriate numbers of instructional minutes according to their proficiency levels. Beginner/Entering ELLs receive 180 minutes in standalone ENL and 180 minutes in integrated ENL/ELA for a total of 360 minutes. Low Intermediate/Emerging ELLs receive 90 minutes in standalone ENL and 180 minutes in integrated ENL/ELA, with 90 flexible minutes for a total of 360 minutes. Intermediate/Transitioning ELLs receive 90 minutes in integrated ENL/ELA and 90 flexible minutes for a total of 180 minutes. Advanced/Expanding ELLs receive 180 minutes in integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. Proficient/Commanding ELLs receive 90 minutes in integrated/ENL or other content area. Home language support is delivered to ELLs in our Freestanding ENL program through the use of dual language texts, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, as well as pairing with other students with the same home language. Six bilingual paraprofessionals are currently assisting our ELL-SWDs. Our multilingual staff members assist students and their parents with translation services and DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit staff is regularly used on an as needed basis. Translators are provided for all content based state tests. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. General education teachers, as well as ENL teachers, use ENL methodologies during instruction to provide a learning classroom environment in which LEP/ELL students can effectively acquire academic content knowledge. ENL teachers, incorporating the push-in/pull-out model, plan carefully with general education teachers to ensure curricular alignment. Both programs use ENL methodologies and follow the Common Core Standards. Students on each of these levels are taught listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Because individual students vary on each level, teachers cover all modalities but according to the group, may emphasize or spend additional time on a specific modality where one group may need some extra support. Certain patterns have been noticed in proficiency levels in the four modalities of the language acquisition. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? All ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native languages during the initial interview, according to their HLS survey. ELLs with Spanish as their native language are appropriately evaluated using the Spanish LAB test upon entry into the ENL program. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Currently, there are no SIFE students in our school. In the event there will be such a student, an instructional plan will be designed for this student based on the scoring data to differentiate instruction. It will be based on the student's levels and needs. Should this student have special needs, a full time bilingual paraprofessional would be assigned to assist the student. Our goal will be to meet both the academic and socio-emotional needs of our SIFE students. Differentiation of instruction will include but is not limited to teaching non-verbal cues to ask for assistance or permission, visual representation cards, picture walk, allowing for additional time, first language instruction, materials, tasks, student response, etc. b. Our plan for ELLs in US schools for less than 3 years is first to acclimate them to their new surroundings and emphasize social survival skills. This includes everyday language and conversational skills. Our instructional plan includes familiarizing students with the letters and sound system of English and building vocabulary and academic skills. c. Our plan for ELLs in US schools for 4-6 years is to increase literacy, specifically in the areas of reading and writing. We increase their exposure to classical literature, a wide variety of genres, and authors. ELLs are being taught to make connections between content-based instruction and current global events. After school Math, Reading, Science, and NYSESLAT Test Prep programs are designed primarily to meet the needs of ELLs who require additional support. Teachers increase levels of text complexity across grade levels to ensure that students are prepared to become college and career ready. d. Currently, there are no long-term ELL students in our school, however, if in the future, if we receive long-term ELLs, we will use data to specifically target each student's weakness in order to drive our instruction to increase the student's literacy to 2  grade level or above. e. ENL professionals are always in collaboration with the classroom teacher to provide extra support materials and instructional techniques to assist former ELLs in remaining on course towards achieving English language excellence. Former ELLs are provided with test accommodations including time extensions, separate locations, bilingual glossaries and dictionaries, simultaneous use of English and other available language editions, oral translations, and other appropriate support. In addition, ENL teachers conduct monthly professional development sessions where classroom teachers can have concerns regarding former ELLs addressed. As CR 154 mandates, commanding students receives .5 units of study per week of integrated ENL in ELA/content area, for two additional years after scoring proficient on the NYSESLAT 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Bilingual paraprofessionals are assigned to ELL-SWDs whose IEP mandates bilingual instruction. Our school ensures that all students, including SWDs identified as ELL students, receive the appropriate state mandated allotment of instructional time in the English language. Students' records are continuously updated and maintained. Teachers of ELL-SWDs use a variety of instructional strategies and grade level materials that provide both access to academic areas and accelerate English language development. These include differentiated instruction, scaffolding, pre-teaching, using Total Physical Response, making fiction/non-fiction connections, developing test vocabulary, as well as higher order thinking skills. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of our ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. The criteria used the ELL-SWDs in ICT classes include recommendations on the IEP, Teacher evaluations, and School Assessment Team reviews. Teachers incorporate recommendations and mandates on the ELL-SWDs' IEPs into daily instruction. Interventions include but are not limited to: AIS, Counseling, Related Services, Parent Conferences to Develop an Action Plan, Collaboration with Community Agencies, SETTS, Targeted Instruction, One to One Bilingual Paraprofessionals, School Assessment Team, Inquiry Team, Differentiated Instruction, Student Assessment Analysis, After School Programs for ELL-SWDs, Extended Day, Title I Push-In/Pull-Out Programs for ELA and Math, AIIP Reading Intervention, RTI, Donors Choose Program, National Dance Institute, Education in Dance, Construction Kids, Puppetry in Practice, trips to various cultural institutions, neighborhood walks, and others. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. In compliance with the State mandated content area testing schedule, ELL students take the following state tests: Math (3rd, 4th, and 5th graders), and Science (4th graders). ELLs who have been in the system for more than one year are mandated to take the NYS ELA test (grades 3, 4, and 5). Since the majority of our ELL students are newcomers with less than three years of services, the majority of them scored at levels 1 and 2. Our school continues to provide all necessary support to all of our ELL students so that all of them will score on level 3 or higher. We continuously implement intensive after school academic intervention programs for ELLs in grades 3-5 concentrating on math, reading, science, and test-taking strategies. The programs are designed to help ELLs who are required to take citywide and state content area tests. Our after-school programs run from October through June. The materials we use are Promethean Boards, Go Math (by Houghton Mifflin), ESL Series, Cornerstone (by Pearson Longman), Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT (training for upcoming NYSESLAT test by Attanasio and Associates, Inc.), New York Progress, various educational computer programs, etc. A vast supply of materials and programs is available to our students in the school library. The LEP students, including students identified with special needs, who have not met the Common Core Standards in reading, writing, listening and speaking are provided with intervention services at the school level including but not limited to AIS, Parent Conferences to Develop an Action Plan, Targeted Instruction, School Assessment Team, Differentiated Instruction, Inquiry Team, Student Assessment Analysis, Title III After School Programs for ELLs, Extended Day, Title I Push-In/Pull-Out Programs for ELA and Math, AIIP Reading Intervention, Author Visits, Read-Alouds, and others. We use home language dictionaries and bilingual personnel to support the home language connection. Within each ENL 3  group, teachers have students research each others countries and write about what they found the most interesting. Students also bring in artifacts, food and regalia from their home countries to share with each other. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year, additional formal assessments of ELLs in four modalities (speaking, listening, reading, and writing) will be considered to utilize during curriculum and instructional planning. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Parents of ELL students are informed of up-coming school programs and updated on their start. All of our ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. Translations and interpretations are offered for all notices sent home with our students. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials, including technology, such as tablets, electronic dictionaries, bilingual books, "books on tapes", video and audio representations of the texts, content are based video and audio supports, and many others are used to support the ELLs. Our school uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to meet the needs of our ELLs. These materials include but are not limited to: content area texts, vast variety of reading resources, educational computer programs, classroom libraries, dual language texts, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, etc. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is delivered to ELLs in our Freestanding ENL program through the use of dual language texts, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, as well as pairing with other students with the same home language. Six bilingual paraprofessionals are currently assisting our ELL-SWDs. Our multilingual staff members assist students and their parents with translation services and DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit staff is regularly used on an as needed basis. Translators are provided for all content based state tests with the exception of the ELA and NYSESLAT. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. P.S. 255 staff ensures that all required service support and resources correspond to ELL's ages and grade levels. At the start of the school year, teachers of ELLs use various ATS reports and analyze data to ensure that all services/resources support are accurately aligned. Students are grouped heterogeneously by age and grade levels. Students are also grouped based on proficiency levels for the maximum of two continuous grades in a group. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? P.S. 255 does not share a building/co-location and therefore resources are only shared within the school. Instructional materials, including technology, such as tablets, electronic dictionaries, bilingual books, "books on tapes", video and audio representations of the texts, content are based video and audio supports, and many others are used to support the ELLs. Our school uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to meet the needs of our ELLs. These materials include but are not limited to: content area texts, vast variety of reading resources, educational computer programs, classroom libraries, dual language texts, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, etc. There is collaboration between ENL instructors, classroom teachers, and out-of-classroom teachers to share resources and best practices to ensure all ELLs' academic, linguistic, and socioemotional needs are met. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 4  Our school assists newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year by offering the Summer in the City Summer School Program to those in need. There are resources for parents on our school website that are available before school begins. In the ELL Summer School program, students learn math and reading as well as how to acclimate to American culture by participating in class trips all around New York City, including trips to city museums and other areas of interest. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently, language electives are not offered to ELLs in our school, however we do have a Russian Language Enrichment Club offered to our fourth graders once a week during school hours on Thursdays. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development is an important key to the success of our academic program. To address this need our school offers a comprehensive professional learning schedule in ENL methodology for all teachers. All ENL teachers, as well as mainstream teachers with ELLs, will participate in monthly staff development activities, grade conferences, and faculty meetings designed to improve their delivery of instruction. All teachers at PS 255 engage in professional learning on a regular basis. Because we have ELL students in every classroom, all teachers and support staff are given professional learning. Sessions are given Mondays during Professional Learning Time. ENL teachers provide PL for a classroom teacher on each grade once a month who then turnkey the information to their grades. During Monday afternoon sessions, teachers learn how to use ENL strategies to better service their ELL students. Administrators, coaches, the testing coordinator, and ENL teachers attend regular PL sessions as well, many of which are offered by the Borough Field Support Centers. Teachers that are interested in seeking professional learning outside the school are supported and given the opportunity to take part in the sessions being offered. The PL sessions will cover but are not limited to the following list of topics: ELL Support; Teaching Reading and Writing using ENL Methodologies; Using Classroom Glossaries and Dictionaries; Differentiating Instruction for ELLs; Scaffolding Language and Learning; Content Area Instruction and Assessment for ELLs; Test-Taking Strategies These sessions will be held once a month during the time that has been reserved for school-wide professional learning. Additional sessions will be held at various times in accordance with teachers' schedules as needed. Agendas and attendance records are kept on file with the school's staff developer, as well as with the ENL teachers. These are maintained as evidence of meeting the requirements. During our Professional Learning sessions, trends are identified and discussed in teacher teams, both horizontally (on the same grade level) and vertically (across the grades) which provides our staff with the support needed to assist ELLs as they transition from one school level to another. Teachers are provided with a form to identify student weaknesses and strengths and to share best practices which will foster student improvement. Our school Parent Coordinator 5  attends an ELL Professional Learning that is provided by the Department of Education on an annual basis. Teachers attend in-house PLs as well as PLs conducted by the DOE. Our school also provides PLs to fifth grade teachers in making sure that their students, especially the ELLs, understand the different types of routines and environments they will be exposed to in middle school as compared to elementary school. The fifth grade teachers understand that their students need to be taught academic vocabulary they may encounter in middle school, as well as necessary life skills. At the PL, teachers are provided with suggestions and recommendations on how to assist ELLs as they transition from elementary to middle school. Assistance is also given to fifth grade teachers in completing middle school applications. The school guidance counselor, the parent coordinator, and ENL teachers help the teachers ensure that parents understand the application process and their options. Certified ENL teachers will conduct 7 ½ hours (general education) and 10 hours (special education) of state-mandated ENL staff development for the school faculty. ENL materials and resources are provided to those classroom teachers who have ELLs. All teachers also have the opportunity to attend off site ongoing workshops and sessions facilitated by the Department of English Language Learners which are advertised weekly in the News & Opportunities for Educators of ELLs newsletter, as well as workshops offered by the ELL support at our borough field support office. Certified ENL teachers will conduct professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 is dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Emphasis is placed on giving teachers of ELLs support as they engage their students in reaching the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL materials and resources are provided to those classroom teachers who have ELLs. The PD sessions will cover but are not limited to the following list of topics: * Using Data to Drive Instruction * Keeping ELLs in Mind - * Teaching Reading and Writing using ENL Methodologies * Using Classroom Glossaries and Dictionaries * Differentiating Instruction for ELLs * Scaffolding Language and Learning * Content Area Instruction and Assessment for ELLs * Examining Key Facts About the Home Countries of Our Ells * Sharing Best Practices For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours are dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school provides a PL to the fifth grade teachers in making sure that their students, especially the ELLs, understand the different types of routines and environments they will be exposed to in the middle school as compared to elementary school. The fifth grade teachers understand that the students need to be taught the vocabulary they may encounter in the middle school, as well as necessary life skills. At the PD the teachers are provided with suggestions and recommendations on how to assist ELLs as they transition from elementary to middle school. Assistance is also given to fifth grade teachers in completing middle school applications. The school guidance counselor, the parent coordinator, and ENL teachers help the teachers ensure that the parents understand the application process and their options. These sessions will be held during the first school period which has been reserved for school-wide professional development. Additional sessions will be held at various times in accordance with teachers' schedules. Agendas and attendance records are kept on file with the school's staff developers, as well as with the ENL teachers. These are maintained 6  as evidence of meeting the requirements. During our Professional Development sessions, trends are identified and discussed in teacher teams, both horizontally (on the same grade level) and vertically (across the grades) which provides our staff with the support needed to assist ELLs as they transition from one school level to another. Teachers are provided with a form to identify student weaknesses and to share best practices which will foment student improvement. Our school parent coordinator attends ELL professional development provided by the Department of Education throughout the year. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our ENL teachers individually meet with the parents or guardians of English language learners at least once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings and other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians, to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This additional meeting includes school staff necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language development in all content areas in English and in the child’s home language. All of these meetings are conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. Our school determines the manner and form of such individual parent meetings, in accordance with collective bargaining agreements. Our school records attendance using existing procedures. All meetings are annotated and information is kept on file in the ENL office. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our parent coordinator, in collaboration with ENL teachers, stress the importance of parent involvement and provide all available resources on how parents can help their children achieve both academic success and improve language proficiency in English. It is also important that parents understand the mandates regarding instruction, testing and materials that affect our ELL population. Parents receive information about on-line homework resources, homework help line “Dial-A-Teacher” available in many languages, as well as assistance at our local library. P.S. 255 strives hard to include all parents in school activities. We strongly encourage parents of ELLs to assist the school community as Learning Leaders. Having a reassuring hand to help a newcomer in their native language to adjust to their new surrounding is an asset beyond value. Our school currently has 10 bilingual learning leaders speaking Russian, Georgian, Uzbek, Chinese, and Italian. There are also nine P.A. board members who help as parent volunteers speaking Uzbek, Russian, Polish, Urdu, and Ukrainian. Our school also conducts hands-on parent workshops such as Science, Math, Holiday Crafts Night, and Family Game Night where parents can network with each other, make new friends, and enjoy a learning experience with their children. Other services provided to ELL parents include translations and interpretations at all Parent Association meetings and workshops by parents and staff members. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 7  8 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Kelly McCann, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 9  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S.255 School DBN: 22K255 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Kelly McCann Title Principal Susan Ehrlich; Iris Nikas Assistant Principal Beth Rocco Parent Coordinator Ni Amen; Vaganyan; Bonsignore; Olga Obertos, PA Co-President Danielle Eldin ELA/Common Bran Fran Levine Math Ambassador Ana Mandelbaum N/A ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Christina Silecchia School Counselor Julia Bove N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Kimberly Vallejo Other Testing Coordinator N/A N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 0  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 22K255 School Name: P.S.255 Barbara Reing School Superintendent: Julia Bove The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Naira Vaganyan ENL teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. According to the information provided on the HLIS, ATS reports, and parental surveys, and on-going face-to-face communications and conferences, the primary language spoken by the parent of each student enrolled in the school is determined by school personnel at the time of admission and throughout the school year. Using this data, the school provides appropriate and timely language assistance to all non-English speaking parents in their native language. This helps parents to effectively communicate with teachers, guidance counselors, school nurse, parent coordinator, and other school staff regarding critical information about their children's education. In addition, our school posts notices in many languages to inform parents of the availability of translation services if needed. 1  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Bengali Burmese Chinese ANY Cantonese Dari/Farsi/Persian Georgian Hebrew Hungarian Hindi Japanese Mandarin English Punjabi Polish Portuguese Russian Spanish Turkish Tadzhik (AKA Tajik) Urdu Uzbek 8 11 10 3 67 0 2 13 2 2 0 2 0 881 0 2 2 301 76 8 11 26 36 0.54 0.75 0.68 0.2 4.55 0 0.14 0.88 0.14 0.14 0 0.14 0 59.81 0 0.14 0.14 20.43 5.16 0.54 0.75 1.77 2.44 9 11 10 2 67 1 2 13 2 2 1 2 1 858 3 3 2 308 77 8 11 28 41 0.61 0.75 0.68 0.14 4.55 0.07 0.88 0.63 0.14 0.14 0.07 0.14 0.07 58.29 0.2 0.2 0.14 20.92 5.23 0.54 0.75 1.9 2.79 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families The annual handbooks September and as needed Newsletters Ongoing throughout the school year Calendars Monthly Parent-teacher conference announcements September and quarterly After-school program information Ongoing, as needed New York State testing dates Ongoing, as needed Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Notification of translation services is printed on every document distributed to our families. Should the parent require translation, oral and written translation services are provided in-house by our bilingual staff members or through the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. Notification of translation services is printed on every document distributed to our families. Should the parent require translation, oral and written translation services are provided in-house by our bilingual staff members or through the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. Notification of translation services is printed on every document distributed to our families. Should the parent require translation, oral and written translation services are provided in-house by our bilingual staff members or through the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. Notification of translation services is printed on every document distributed to our families. Should the parent require translation, oral and written translation services are provided in-house by our bilingual staff members or through the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. Notification of translation services is printed on every document distributed to our families. Should the parent require translation, oral and written translation services are provided in-house by our bilingual staff members or through the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. Notification of translation services is printed on every document distributed to our families. Should the parent require translation, oral and written translation services are provided in-house by our bilingual 3  General overview of student curriculum September; ongoing and as needed Letters from the school leadership Ongoing, as needed Student academic progress reports Ongoing, as needed staff members or through the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. Notification of translation services is printed on every document distributed to our families. Should the parent require translation, oral and written translation services are provided in-house by our bilingual staff members or through the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. Notification of translation services is printed on every document distributed to our families. Should the parent require translation, oral and written translation services are provided in-house by our bilingual staff members or through the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. Notification of translation services is printed on every document distributed to our families. Should the parent require translation, oral and written translation services are provided in-house by our bilingual staff members or through the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Initial Parental Interview Upon admission; September and ongoing, as needed interpretation service(s)? For in-person meetings, interpretation services are provided by bilingual staff members when possible. Documents issued by NYC DOE and available on its website, are used in oral and written communication with parents. If interpretation of school issued documents or documents given by parents in their native language is needed, then the translation and interpretation unit is contacted and their services are utilized. When necessary, our school utilizes an over-the-phone interpreter from the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. 4  ELL Orientation Meeting September Grade Level Orientation Meeting September Parent-Teacher Conferences Quarterly ELL Parent Workshops 5 Workshops (October, November, December, January, and February) For in-person meetings, interpretation services are provided by bilingual staff members when possible. Documents issued by NYC DOE and available on its website, are used in oral and written communication with parents. If interpretation of school issued documents or documents given by parents in their native language is needed, then the translation and interpretation unit is contacted and their services are utilized. When necessary, our school utilizes an over-the-phone interpreter from the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. For in-person meetings, interpretation services are provided by bilingual staff members when possible. Documents issued by NYC DOE and available on its website, are used in oral and written communication with parents. If interpretation of school issued documents or documents given by parents in their native language is needed, then the translation and interpretation unit is contacted and their services are utilized. When necessary, our school utilizes an over-the-phone interpreter from the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. For in-person meetings, interpretation services are provided by bilingual staff members when possible. Documents issued by NYC DOE and available on its website, are used in oral and written communication with parents. If interpretation of school issued documents or documents given by parents in their native language is needed, then the translation and interpretation unit is contacted and their services are utilized. When necessary, our school utilizes an over-the-phone interpreter from the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. For in-person meetings, interpretation services are provided by bilingual staff members when possible. Documents issued by NYC DOE and available on its website, are used in oral and written communication with parents. If interpretation of school issued 5  Scheduled Parent Meetings As needed Annual ELL Meeting Individually scheduled for each parent throughout the year documents or documents given by parents in their native language is needed, then the translation and interpretation unit is contacted and their services are utilized. When necessary, our school utilizes an over-the-phone interpreter from the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. For in-person meetings, interpretation services are provided by bilingual staff members when possible. Documents issued by NYC DOE and available on its website, are used in oral and written communication with parents. If interpretation of school issued documents or documents given by parents in their native language is needed, then the translation and interpretation unit is contacted and their services are utilized. When necessary, our school utilizes an over-the-phone interpreter from the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. For in-person meetings, interpretation services are provided by bilingual staff members when possible. Documents issued by NYC DOE and available on its website, are used in oral and written communication with parents. If interpretation of school issued documents or documents given by parents in their native language is needed, then the translation and interpretation unit is contacted and their services are utilized. When necessary, our school utilizes an over-the-phone interpreter from the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, our school has various strategies in place to reach limited-English-proficient families. Upon admission, parents/guardians of students must fill out three blue cards with emergency contact information and specific instructions for each individual student. One card is kept in the main office, another in the nurse's office, and the last is kept with the classroom teacher. On these cards, the guardians' preferred language is listed, along with descriptions on what to do in case of an emergency. For parents/guardians who speak languages other than English, as indicated on the students' blue cards, bilingual staff are utilized for interpretation services in the case of a school emergency. When necessary, an over-the-phone interpreter is used from the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. 6  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our school ensures that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 throughout the school year. During faculty conferences, ELL Professional Learning meetings, and grade meetings, ENL instructors provide information and details from CR A-663 to ensure all staff members are meeting compliance. In addition to these ongoing meetings, the ENL team are utilized as resources for classroom and out-of-classroom teachers. The ENL department has a hard copy of CR A-663 so that staff members can use it as a reference. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) P.S 255 is responsible for providing each parent whose primary language is other than English and who requires language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. Translated versions of this document are available at: http://schools.nyc.gov/RulesPolicies/ParentBillofRights/ Parents+Bill+of+Rights+and+Responsiblities.htm. Our school has posted, in a conspicuous location at the primary entrance to our school, a sign printed in different languages, indicating the availability of interpretation services. Our school’s safety plan contains procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. P.S.255 follows the procedures outlined on the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit website in order to meet the translation and interpretation requirements set forth in regulation A-663. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school gathers feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services through a parent survey sent to all student families in September, during ELL parent workshops throughout the school year, as well as individual parent meetings as needed. Data is collected and analyzed by the parent coordinator and ENL instructors to implement guardians' feedback to improve language services. Workshops and meetings are then scheduled based on that feedback. 7 
