 21K281 School Name: I.S. 281 JOSEPH B CAVALLARO Principal: MARIA BENDER   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: Joseph B. Cavallaro I.S. 281 332100010281 BEDS Code: School Number (DBN): 21K281 Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: 6-8 8787 24 th Avenue, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11214 718-996-6706 Maria Delfini Fax: 718-996-4186 mdelfin@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Maria Bender AntonySolino Maureen Maxwell Hadiya Boyd Felicity Henry Kevin Richtback District Information Geographical District: 21 Isabel DiMola Superintendent: 1401 Emmons Avenue , Brooklyn, N.Y. Superintendent’s Office Address: Idimola@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-648-0209 Phone Number: 718-648-2165 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn South MauriciereDeGovia FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89 th Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. MDeGovi@schools.nyc.gv Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4862 Phone Number: 718-759-4842 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Maria Bender AntonySolino Maureen Maxwell Felicity Henry Kevin Richtback HadiyaBoyd Jacquelyn Wiederhold *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher/   AntonellaFlorida LizaKadiu TBD/Parent Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? As the magnet school for Science Technology Engineering Arts and Math (STEAM), it is our mission to provide every child with the support to grow intellectually, physically, socially and emotionally. In an advanced, inquiry based learning environment, we will strive as leaders for the 21st century for both technology and the arts. It is our vision to help guide students in the development of their character and academic potential so they can become teachers, leaders and dreamers. We provide rigorous, challenging and content-rich educational programs so that when students leave I.S. 281, they are prepared for college and career.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Joseph B. Cavallaro IS 281, is a large diverse, urban middle school in Bensonhurst, NY. Staff, parents and students effectively, communicate, collaborate and support our high academic and behavioral standards. We are a school of S.T.E.A.M. Our students are exposed to talent programs with a concentration in Technology, Math , Science, Engineering, and the Arts. Students take on the role of creators in STEM Technology as they cover topics such as video game creation, architecture/3-D modeling, city planning/design, and app creation. In STEM Math they get an opportunity to tackle the world of mathematics in a creative and interactive way with the use of technology. Moving forward, our STEM Math program will have a Virtual Enterprise component. In STEM Science Talent, students start off the year learning exactly how forensic scientists solve crimes. Students explore college level Physics and enter the exciting world of Lego Robotics where they construct robots to do many imaginative activities. Additionally, our students are exposed to the Arts in the areas of Dance, Vocal/Inst Music and Art We believe in student voice. We have an active student government organization comprised of an executive board that meets monthly with the principal. In addition, representatives from each class meet by grade with their grade advisors. Student Government held its annual campaigning and election cycle and its executive board members have been elected for the upcoming school year. The executive board creates our theme days, meets with administration and their peers, and heads our community service drives while building ties with the community. To encourage a philanthropic outlook, students participate in Patriotic Community Events, Penny Harvest, Pennies for Patients, Austism Speaks, and collection of food for a local food pantry. At I.S. 281 there is an expectation that teachers communicate regularly with parents and/or guardians. Regular communication with parents includes a school website, Skedula, which is an online system that parents can have full access to their child’s academic progress including daily homework assignment, upcoming exams/projects, open communication with teachers and continuous monitoring of their child's grade. In addition parents receive trimester progress reports, weekly phone calls from the Principal using our One Call Now messaging system, Principal Remind texts, emails, report cards and information posted on our school website. This provides parents with a clear understanding of expectations and student progress. I.S. 281 has had an opportunity to be part of the Chancellor's Learning Partners Program, the first year of a three year cycle. In the 2016-7 school year, we were one of five schools that was matched with Middle School 88 through Learning Partners. One of the initiatives birthed from our partnership has been literacy. Through our visits with our host school, and under the tutelage of Principal Aileen Mitchell, our LPP Team was provided with an authentic opportunity for teacher collaboration through our learning focus of literacy that was aligned to CCLS, enhanced student achievement in 21st century skills, and showcased leadership capabilities of staff. All teachers implemented strategies to increase students' writing. Students produced sample writing pieces across curriculum areas. Through several inquiry cycles, LPP Team members tested strategies, analyzed data to find the best possible method for student growth in writing. An added benefit was an increase in teacher collaboration across subject areas and community building. In order to develop leadership in our staff, we were given the opportunity to have two Model Teachers in the 2018-2019 school year and hope to grow to a third position in September through the support of LPP. Our Model Teachers have worked closely with a cadre of new teacher hires around effective teaching strategies, the work of intervisitations, looking at student work protocols and using formative data to drive planning and instruction. In the 2018-19 school year, we seek to expand on this work through new teacher capacity building and continued support of the first cohort of Model Teacher mentees from the 2017-2018 school year. The configuration for LPP has changed 0  and in the 2017-18 we have been working in a triad with a new host school, MS 137 under Principal Laura Mastrogiovanni and with MS 226 in Queens. This triad focused on three areas: Teacher Collaboration, Curriculum Design and Data Inquiry and these areas will be examined deeper within each school. We were able to work with LPP Partner and Host schools establishing and refining systems for common planning and ongoing curriculum review and revision. For the 2018-19 school year this triad will focus on Literacy, Assessment and continue with Teacher Collaboration. We will continue with our teacher intervisitations. An intervisitation schedule will be distributed to teachers each week, inviting them to visit classroom of Model Teachers to observe best practices and a variety of instructional routines that support student engagement, effective questioning and discussion and the use of assessment in instruction. At I.S. 281 there is a shared expectation among students, teachers, and parents that students demonstrate personal behaviors conducive to success including respect, perseverance, determination, honesty, and integrity. We seek to cultivate our outside partnerships with the following groups to further enrich the student experience and enhance the collaborative culture of the I.S. 281 community at large:  GEMS (Girls Empowerment Movement)  Mighty Milers  Billion Oyster Project   Project Boost  District Debate Team  ARISTA elementary school teaching assistants SeaPerch Robotics 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. English Language Learners comprise approximately 17% of our student population. These students represent diverse backgrounds and speak a variety of languages, including Chinese(Mandarin & Cantonese), Spanish, Russian, Urdu, Arabic. NYSESLAT test modality report revealed that reading and writing remains a greater area of challenge than listening and speaking for a majority of our students. According to the School Performance Dashboard, the average proficiency level for ELLs in ELA is 2.57 in 2017-18 compared to 2.27 in 2016-2017. There are similar results in math with the average proficiency level at 2.87 in 2017-18 compared to 2.64 in 2016-17. The 2018 June Instructional Reports revealed that standards relating to reading such as point of view, word meaning, and central idea are areas of challenge for our ENL students. Students with Disabilities comprise approximately 19% of our student population. According to results from the latest NYS Exams (2018) , there were 16% of SWDs that scored in Levels 3 & 4, an increase of 11% from last year's state exam in ELA and 8% Levels 3 & 4 in Math, a 3% increase from last years state exam. The June 2018 instructional Report for NYS ELA revealed that overall standards relating to expressions and functions are an area of challenge for this groups of students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. As a school community, our greatest strength reflecting the Framework for Great Schools is in the element of Collaborative Teachers. On our 2016-17 Quality Review Report, we received a rating of Well Developed on indicator 4.2 (Teacher Teams and leadership development) and it was an Area of Celebration. We are committed to instilling the importance of education, lifelong learning, and college and career readiness. We recognize the importance of collaboration among teachers, parents, students and members of the community to support a positive learning 1  environment. To further enhance collaboration between staff members, we have continued to implement and refine Teacher Team Common planning. Teams meet during the week, inclusive of Mondays professional learning time. We also completed our third and final year as part of a grant through the Teacher Incentive Fund. We will be entering our second year as part of the Chancellor's Learning Partners Program. We expect to have 3 Model Teachers and a new host school, MS 137, under the leadership of distinguished Principal Laura Mastrogiovanni. Our LPP team this year has include a Literacy Coach, an Assistant Principal, 1-2 ELA teachers, a Social Studies Teacher and a Science Teacher. Teachers are encouraged to visit the classrooms of our lead teachers to view best practices, as well as, specific pedagogical strategies that support effective and highly effective teaching. Teachers explain that "they feel supported, are listened to and enjoy the many opportunities to collaborate and share with colleagues." An area of focus reflecting the 2016-17 Quality Review Report is in the area of Instructional Core where on Indicator 1.2 (Pedagogy), we received a rating of Proficient. Teacher's use of high-level questioning and varied supports engaged students in challenging tasks and high level discussion across most classrooms, however, a lack of extensions and limited options for student leadership hinder students' opportunities to lead discussion and tasks and take ownership of their learning. This is also evident in data from our observation where Component 3B: Questioning and Discussion Techniques on the Danielson Framework which continues to receive the highest % of teachers rated developing and ineffective with 39.8%. However this is a decrease of 7.2% from last year's percentage which was 47 % developing and/or ineffective. It is evident that our teachers use exit slips, formative and summative assessments, and student checklists to assess student work and drive instruction. However, our school as a whole does not consistently and deeply disaggregate and analyze data to uncover vertical trends and gaps in standard alignment necessary to make adjustments to affect school-wide practice. As a result, data from Advance showed that 34.16% of our teachers were rated Developing and/or Ineffective in Component 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction this year. Therefore, there is limited information to evaluate curricula and the impact of teaching on student performance. As a result, this year we added Inquiry Cycles to our work on Mondays during Extended Day Collaboration time. Teachers worked in their PLCs and utilized data to identify trends, selected a target group and area of focus, created an action plan, assessed and analyzed student progress and then reflected upon their work to provide next steps. This allowed us to have four inquiry cycles during this school year. We will continue with inquiry cycles in the 2018-19 school year, as well as the creation of Instructional cabinet to analyze date from the cycles of inquiry. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 21K281 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1334 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 63 62 2 17 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 32 30 2 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 87.0% % Attendance Rate 78.9% % Reduced Lunch 17.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.1% 24.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 28.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.25 0% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 54.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES NO NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO NO YES NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 112 108 94.1% 7.7% 18.1% 6.4% 41.0% 0.4% 6 21% 7.9 52.1% 64% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A NO YES NO YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Every year we take a close look at our hard and soft data. We are very pleased with our overall results in ELA and Math this year. On the 2018 NYS ELA Examination the following subgroups showed:  55% of ALL students proficient which is an increase of 16% compared to last year's NYS ELA Exam (2017).  16% of SWDs proficient which is an increase of 11% compared to last year's NYS ELA Exam  13% of ELLs proficient which is an increase of 10% compared to last year's NYS ELA Exam. On the 2018 NYS Math Examination the following subgroups showed:  53% of ALL students proficient which is an increase of 9% to last year's NYS Math Exam (2017)  8% of SWDs proficient which is an increase of 3% compared to last year's NYS Math Exam.  34% of ELLs proficient which is an increase of 9% compared to last year's NYS Math Exam. Portfolios, projects, tasks, quarterlies, class grades and state tests all resulted in substantial gains. Our results in ELA this year have shown that our ELL's and SWDs continue to have difficulty meeting promotional criteria and are the highest percentages of our students who achieve a level 2 on the state ELA and Math exams. These "Level 2's" including ELL's and SWDs will continue to be our targeted subgroup in the 2018-2019 school year. We will also include a focus on the SWDs, especially the Black and Hispanic populations. We continued this year by having each teacher observed by each of the four administrators. Feedback on each observation was shared among the administrative team during weekly cabinet meetings and via email. Upon examination of our end of the year data from Advance, out of 327 observations conducted the following components were rated Developing and/or Ineffective: 3b: Using Questioning and Discussion = 39.8% 3c: Engaging Students in Learning =31.81 % 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction = 34.16% These were the lowest rated components in our MOTP summary. 4  As a result, IS 281's School Leadership Team determined that our 2018-19 Instructional Focus will be, “Students will engage in targeted classroom instruction and differentiated performance tasks that will meet the individual needs of all learners, as determined by unified, data based iO assessments tracking students' skills aligned with the standards. Our school Quality Guide shows that we are Exceeding Targets in Parent-Principal Trust, Q.R. 4.1,Q.R. 4.2 (Collaborative Teachers) Q.R.1.4 (Supportive Environment), Q.R.1.3 ( Effective School Leadership). However, we are not meeting target areas in the following: ● Common Core Shifts in Literacy, Parent Involvement in School, Teacher-Principal Trust, NYC School Survey ( Strong Family-Community Ties) Results from our Quality Review Report in 2016-17 shows that we are Proficient in QR2.2: how well the school assesses what students are learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of all students including Students With Disabilities and English Language Learners will reach their individualized learning target in ELA and Math on the 2018-19 NYS ELA and Math Examinations . 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-based instructional program, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change: Sept. 5, 2018-June 26, 2019  A 2018-19 NYS ELA and Math goal proficiency rating (learning target) will be established for each student. ELA & Math tchrs.  iReady diagnostics will be administered online in ELA and Math to all 6th grade students 3x a year. Professional development will be given to teachers 2x a year by the iReady implementation person. Grades 7&8 will use IXL for diagnostic exams.  Working in Teams and Collaboration with Coaches , teachers will create departmental assessment using standards based questions. These will be created in iO Assessments, which will allow teachers to collect data indicating how students perform on each question and standards, as well as trends across the grade, classes and subroups. Teachers will also use a common language to norm high, medium, and low examples of student work from the periodic assessments aligned to the NYS standards.  Teachers will continue to implement a problem of the week in Math in which students have multiple avenues in reaching a solution, during which they will have meaningful conversations involving conceptual understanding of the content. Teacher Teams Teacher Teams, (9/26-10/26/18) (1/9/19-2/9/19) ( 5/8/19-6/8/19) Nov 2018, Feb 2019, May2019 Set. 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 October 2018-June 2019 Administration, Literacy & Math Coaches, Administration,Literacy & Math Coaches, All Teachers Administration, Literacy and Math Coaches, All Teachers Administration, Literacy & Math Coaches, Ed. Consultant Ms. Katz, ELA and Math Task Forces Administration, All Teachers 6  ● The Instructional Focus (see above) for the school this year will be displayed in all classrooms and administrative offices . This will be supported by observing teachers and providing support to the teachers in need. ● All content area teachers, including teachers of ELA and Math, will continue to participate in vocabulary professional learning groups during the Monday professional development session. Goals include increasing comprehension of academic vocabulary across content areas, including the application of academic vocabulary and improving student comprehension and writing especially for the SWDs and English Language Learners. Teachers will familiarize students with domain specific vocabulary that aligns with the NYS Exam. ● Professional learning will be provided by the Literacy and Math Coaches, Lead Teachers and Consultants during Monday afternoons focusing on collecting, analyzing and utilizing data trends to inform classroom activities, plan follow up lessons, and the development of common assessments to address grade-wide areas of critical need. ● To develop trust and collaboration, teacher teams will use iO Assessments to develop common baseline/diagnostics, trimester uniform exams aligned to the CCLS in each of the content areas, including ELA and Math, Scaffolds for English Language Learners and students with disabilities in the form of glossaries, sentence starters, and other support documents will be implemented. Data from these assessments will be analyzed to plan next steps for instruction. ● The school principal will analyze trends with the Instructional Cabinet consisting of Administrators, Coaches and Lead Teachers to provide feedback on data analysis and teacher team professional collaboration sheets( submitted the last Wednesday of each month) which contain evidence Teacher Teams, October 2018, Administrative Cabinet Teacher Teams Teachers Teams , ENLS and Students in high needs subgroup January 2019, April 2019 Sept 5, 2018-June 25, 2019 Sept. 5, 2018-June 25, 2019 All Teachers monthly from Sept Administrative Cabinet, Consultant Clara Katz, Coaches, Lead Teachers Administrative Cabinet 7  of each team’s work in the form of minutes from their meetings, reflections and next steps. ● Logs of support will be used for teachers not making significant growth. Mid- year conversations will take place to determine progress on meeting goals. All teachers will receive timely verbal and written feedback on next steps.  Principal will meet with Asst. Principals three times a year to discuss Accountability Checkpoint Reports to debrief and interpret all student/teacher data.  Teachers will utilize the ReThinkED SEL Program once a week to assist students in processing and applying SEL skills, behaviors and attitudes in authentic ways, to support their learning. Teachers of ENLs & SWDs 2018-June 2019 Sept 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 Sept 5, 2018- June 26, 2019 Administrative Cabinet Administrative Cabinet Administrative Cabinet Administrative Cabinet  To foster trust and collaboration, teachers will Administration continue to implement school wide intervisitations to encourage the sharing of ideas. Coaches, Content Area TaskForces Sept. 5, 2019- June 25, 2019 Weekly Teachers rated developing or ineffective in MOTP 8  Teachers, Coaches, Administration Asst. Principal and Principal Teachers Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English Language Learners, and other high-need students subgroups: ● Teachers will utilize Skedula to identify under performing students with a focus on those who scored a Proficiency Rating of 2.0-2.5 on NYS ELA Exams, in addition to ELLs and SWDs, assigning intervention strategies, including one-to-one tutoring, small group tutoring, peer tutoring, ELL small group tutoring, HW help and small group tutoring for students with disabilities All teachers All Teachers All teachers Sept. 5, 2019- June 25, 2019 Administration, LPP Team, Literacy & Math Coaches, Ed. Consultant Ms. Katz, Administration & Coaches ● While engaged in analyzing data trends, teachers will brainstorm and implement scaffolds and supporting documents for student subgroups. Lesson modifications will be made to ensure equal access for all learners. Teachers of ELLS and SWDs Sept. 5, 2019- June 25, 2019 Administration Teachers of ELLS and SWDs Sept. 5, 2019- June 25, 2019 Administration ,Literacy & Math Coaches, Ms. Katz, consultant 9  ● Use of a backwards planning model as well as support documents for diverse learners, including glossaries and sentence frames. Grade 6 ENL students Sept. 5, 2019- June 25, 2019 Teachers of ENLs, Arts Connection Liaison, Administrative Cabinet Sept. 5, 2018-June 25, 2019 Sept. 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 Sept. 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 Administration, Grade 6 ELA & Math teachers All Teachers, Administrative Cabinet Teachers and Administration ● Data will also reflect student subgroups, including ELL status and IEP modifications for students with disabilities ● To develop trust native language support and additional arts programs will be provided through ongoing partnerships with Arts Connection to celebrate cultural diversity. Teachers of ELLs and SWDs ● Our ELLs in Grade 6 will continue to use iReady where students go online 2 times a week. The online program rigorously prepares our students for state assessments with close, text evidence based questions, higher order thinking and open ended response questions combined with authentic text passages ELLs and students in high needs group ● ELLS and Students with Disabilities will be programmed to receive RTI (Response to Intervention) classes in their individual programs receiving extra support in either ELA or Math.  ENL Afterschool Academy and Small Group Instruction (SGI) programs have been created to support students through reading, writing, speaking and listening activities with an emphasis on providing scaffolds to build conceptual understanding, academic skills and language development. Afterschool ENL Teachers & those teachers with SGI as Professional Assignment Sept.5,2018-June 26, 2019 Nov.2018 Feb.2019, April 2019 Engaging families and supporting their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core in order to support their children at home: All Teachers ● For progressive monitoring, we distribute progress reports from Skedula every trimester to parents/guardians ● Parents receive a grade syllabi for the entire year in all of their classes during our Parent Meet and Greet in October. All Teachers Administration All Teachers, Guidance, Administration 0  ● Tuesday afternoons, during Parent Engagement, teachers will conduct parent workshops on topics selected by parents from a parent survey. ● Parents utilize our online grading system, Skedula, to view daily homework assignments, projects, tests/quizzes, rubrics to monitor their child’s academic progress. ● Our Parent Coordinator distributes pamphlets on various topics to parents/guardians during Open School times Parent, Teachers, Students Parent Coordinator Oct. 2018 Teachers and Administration Tuesday afternoons Teachers and Administration beginning Sept. 5 2018- to June 26, 2019 Teachers and Administration Oct. 2018, November 2018, Feb. 2019, May 2019 Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Family newsletter, school website, One Call Now, REMIND texts will be utilized. Parent meetings will be facilitated by teachers, coaches and administration to introduce the curriculum, explain how students are being assessed and share areas of celebration and next steps. Resources that students can utilize at home will be shared with parents. The Common Core Standards along with the new Next Generation Standards will be shared with parents with examples of assignments that align to these standards. These will occur a minimum of once per trimester and also during Parent Engagement Tuesdays afternoons during Extended Day. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Conceptual consolidation for use of multiple funding sources (e.g. TL, Title I, Title III, C4e) will be utilized to support professional development for teachers, the purchase of resources, and funding for before school, after-school and Saturday programs.  Funding will also be utilized to support our continued participation in the Learning Partners Plus Program.  A Literacy and Math Coach will be funded this year. 1  Funding will be utilized to support teachers with using iReady and interpreting data by planning two professional development workshops with the iReady implementation manager/director.  Professional Development time is scheduled during the extended day. Funding will be utilized to pay an Ed. Consultant to assist with workshops, lunch and learns, intervisitations, curriculum mapping, lesson planning/ backwards planning. and demonstration lessons.  Teachers have common preps embedded into their program to meet with their teacher teams in planning lessons/units, making adjustments to the curriculum to incorporate enrichment activities, including modifications for ENLs and Students with Disabilities, and in analyzing data and student work.  Remuneration for Administration, Task Force Teams.  Per session for Task Force Teams for curriculum writing and assessment design. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, a minimum of 60% of all students will have demonstrated an increase in scores from the baseline assessments to the benchmark assessments.  Teachers will inter-visit with each other and focus on best practices and three components of Domain 3 of the Danielson Framework for Teaching (3b,3c,3d) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.)  Teacher teams in collaboration with coaches and administration will develop, administer and analyze data resulting from assessments created from released NYS ELA and Math questions aligned to current units of study  Teachers will review itemized test results by standards using iO assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Here at Joseph B Cavallaro I S. 281 we believe in the importance of creating a safe and suport school, family and community environment where students thrive and are both respected and show respect. The 2016-17 School Quality Review showed that we received a score of Well Developed for Q.R. 1.4 which talks about how safe and inclusive the school is while supporting social-emotional growth. Data from the 2017-18 School Quality Guide showed the following:  An increase of 12% Positive (overall 64%) for classroom behavior surveyed by students who took the Learning Environment Survey from last year's score of 52%.  68% of the students said that most students listened carefully when the teacher gave directions, an increase of 15% from last year  67% of students said that most students follow the rules in class, an increase of 10% from last year  45% of students said that most students behaved well even when the teacher wasn't watching, an increase of 8% from last year The Principal and one Assistant Principal have know been trained in Social Emotional Learning. For the 2018-19 School we intend to incorporate social emotional learning within our school day through the following resources:  ThinkCERCA has included SEL lessons within their online writing program  Newsela has included a set of lessons that are differentiated on five levels tailored to Social Emotional Learning.  We have purchased two programs, RethinkEd and Brain Power that will be used during the school day. RethinkEd provides a comprehensive and emotional learning solution that includes assessment, multi-tiered curriculum, professional learning and a behavior support and progress monitoring resource. It provides data tracking, behavior management tools, and allows for effective monitoring of student progress and outcomes. Students will be able to create customized learning and behavior plans. Brain Power is a second program which teaches physical and mental brain breaks, mindfulness practices and social emotional wellness strategies that support a positive classroom atmosphere. This program includes teacher and mentor workshops along with classroom visits by their staff members to help create daily Brain Power routines. Teachers and student government representatives from each class will be trained alongside each other in Brain Power. Part 2 – Annual Goal 3  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Through whole school and targeted social emotional supports, in place for all students, by June 2019, there will be a decline in student suspension, student referrals, and detentions resulting in targeted students achieving a grade of at least 75 in the four core subject areas. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Assistant Principal Assistant Principals, teachers, and all students 10/19/2018. 1/18/2019, Administration 4/12/2019 Sept 5, 2018- June 25, 2019 Sept. 17-Dec. 17, 2018 weekly Sept. 2018-June 2018 weekly Administrative cabinet, deans, Teachers, guidance, social worker, mental health consultant Coaches,teachers, administration teachers, coach, administration, ed. consultant Principal and Assistant Principals,  Administration will review mid marking period progress reports to determine which students at risk of getting a grade below a 75 in the four core subject areas.  We will provide additional social-emotional support for all students through the continued work of peer mediation, growing restorative circles work, and emphasis on conversation and de-escalation by deans and a new partnership with Mental Health Consultants  Brain Power Staff will conduct classroom visits to work with students on creating daily Brain Power routines. It is our goal to have class representatives receive leadership training so that they can lead routines for student body at assemblies, cafeterias, school year in order to promote a positive school culture.  To foster trust and collaboration, teachers will continue to implement school-wide intervisitations to encourage the sharing of ideas, especially those that teach ENLs and SWDs All teachers and class reps. 5 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administrative cabinet, guidance counselors, service providers Oct. 23, 2018 and Nov. 6, 2018 Administration, Coaches Sept. 5, 2019- June 25, 2019 Sept. 5, 2019- June 25, 2019 Student Support Providers Student support providers and guidance counselors  Teachers will also be involved in professional development workshops facilitated by reThinked to utilize their online SEL program.   Continue a focus of disaggregating attendance, lateness, and suspension data to surface students of concern to discuss during both PPT meetings and SIT meetings, especially if they are ELL students or SWDs. all teachers All Teachers  The ELL Coach from ENL Field Support will conduct walk throughs and train the trainer professional development for our ENL teachers on how to develop language objectives. The ENL Teachers will then present professional development on Election Day to train teachers on how to incorporate language objectives into their daily lessons.   Student suspensions will be monitored on a biweekly basis, identifying the type of infraction and location of infraction. Students at risk , Students who have previously received principal and/or superintendent suspensions will have follow-up meetings with the Student Support Provider (dean) or guidance counselor. ENL Teachers, Entire Staff Students Students, Student Support Providers 6  ENLS, SWD, teachers of ELA Sept. 5, 2019- June 25, 2019 ENLS, SWD, ENL Teachers ENLs and SWDs ENL students , All teachers Sept. 5, 2019- June 25, 2019 Sept. 5, 2019- June 25, 2019 weekly from Sept 2017-June 2018 Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups:  ThinkCerca has a library of leveled SEL authentic texts, scaffolded for different levels of readiness. Teachers will have the ability to different their lessons for the ENL and SWD students. They also have resources to assist with supplementing the Cerca sets to meet the needs of ENL students.  Partnership with the NIA after-school program which provides multiple programs to children of all different needs and learning styles.  The Special Considerations for Teachers of ENLs and SWDs will be utilized as a resource to support teachers in meeting the needs of student subgroups  For all high need students, particularly ENL teachers will familiarize students with domain specific academic vocabulary that aligns with the NYS tests. Engaging families and supporting their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support their children at home:  Parents will have access to student grades via Pupil Path, an online grading system, and be able to communicate with their child's teachers at their convenience. Parents  Teachers will utilize parent engagement time on Tuesday afternoons to communicate with parents, addressing Teachers, Parents Daily An Assistant Principal supervises this program Assistant Principal supervising ENL, ENL Teachers, Literacy Coach, Ed. consultant Ms. Katz Principal, Assistant Principal supervising ENL and ELA, Adminisration, Teachers, Administration 7  positive aspects of student work habits and areas for improvement. Translation support will be provided.  To provide assistance to parents and foster trust, SEL curriculum and instructional resources will be shared during workshops along with strategies supporting it at home. Brain Power will work with Parent Coordinator to set up parent workshops on homework tips, mindful parenting, positive discipline and proactive communication Parent Weekly Teachers, Administration, Parent Coordinator Brain Power Mentors, Administration, Parent Coordinator PTA mtgs. beginning Oct 2018-May 2019 N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parents will be updated about our SEL Curriculum through various modes of communication such as Family newsletter, IS 281 website, REMIND app, One Call Now phone system.  On Parent Teacher Conferences parents will be invited to workshops on SEL sponsored by consultants from reThinkEd and Brain Power, along with our Coaches and Parent Coordinator.  Each student's teachers will communicate with parents via Pupil Path, which provides for two-way communication between teachers and families. Conversations will focus on student progress and strategies that can be implemented at home to support success. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Conceptual consolidation for use of multiple funding sources (e.g. TL, Title I, Title III, C4e) will be utilized to support professional development for teachers, the purchase of resources, and funding for before school, after-school and Saturday programs. Funding will also be utilized to support SEL curriculum from ThinkCerca, Newsela, reThinkEd, and Brain Power.  8 Literacy Coach and Math Coaches will be funded this year.   Per session for teachers will be available for continuous work on documenting the SEL curriculum across the  content areas. Supervisor per session will also be available for review progress monitoring from reThinkEd, Brain Power, ThinkCERCA and Newsela. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a decline in student suspensions, referrals and detentions, resulting in targeted students achieving a grade of 75 on two of the 4 core subject areas. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Skedula Student Mid Year Progess Reports and Marking Period Report Cards will be reviewed for grades 75 and above in core subject areas. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. When comparing the results of all 3 NYS Exams (ELA, Math, Science) over a period of 3 years from 2014-15 to 2016-17, the SWD subgroup had not met safe harbor targets for the last two consecutive years on the NYS ELA, Math and Science Exams. Therefore this year, with our Literacy Coach serving as a facilitator a Class 711 Cohort was created which met to address team building strategies for this class which included Students with Disabilities (IEP) , General Education and ENL students. At each meeting, noticings, parent outreach and next steps were discussed. The class was divided up among all content area teachers and each were assigned 4 students to personally track over the year. The cohort committed to trying different co-teaching models and agreed to meet to share successes and challenges. This class also served as a model ThinkCERCA classroom and was visited by the CEO of ThinkCERCA and other principals during a Learning Walk/Best Practice Visit. Teacher also committed to intervisit each other. All teachers part of this cohort agreed at the end of the year that it was an amazing experience for both teacher and student. As a result, we hope to create more of these cohorts, especially for our ICT students and their teachers in the 2018-19 School Year. Our End of the Year Growth Meeting with a representative from ThinkCerca showed the following results:   Student work samples showed evidence of improvement in writing development and organization. Student work included multiple pieces of relevant evidence. This area was particular important because in the beginning of the year, students were not citing relevant information when writing argumentative pieces.  41.8% of students showed an increase in their rubric grade from September to May. The national average was 40%  14.3 % scored higher in lessons aligned to grade level from September to May.  Grade 6 students completed 6 lessons per student and almost 2 Applied Writing lessons  Grade 7 students completed 14 lessons per student and 6.6 Applied Writing lessons  Grade 8 students completed 8.2 lessons per student and 6.3 Applied Writing lessons.  Cavallaro students completed on average 4.6 Applied Writing Lessons. The National Average of ThinkCERCA users was 4. This was slightly above the national average. Next Steps for the 2018-19 School Year with utilizing ThinkCERCA will include the following:  An increase in the usage of narrative units and resources;  Utilization of the new SEL Cerca set;   Encourage teachers to assign unique reading and writing lessons. Increase in the utilization of the grammar and usage resources; 0  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Through collaborative teaching practice, students with special needs will reach their individual goals in writing as measured by completing 4.5 Applied Writing Tasks from ThinkCERCA. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Students are given a baseline, benchmark and end of the year assessments in ThinkCERCA. The baseline data will be used to determine students’ reading levels. Data is shared with data teams and is additionally used to determine targeted student groupings. and individualized writing goals. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students window 1-Tier 2 (Small Group instruction) is conducted during the school day using student assessment data to identify high needs subgroups where they will be provided with additional support in the argumentative writing process and citing of evidence. Grade level teacher cohorts will meet and use the time to analyze student data from ThinkCERCA looking for trends and patterns, as well as using the data to plan units and adapt units to meet student needs. Professional Development will be provided by the ThinkCERCA consultant and Literacy Coach. PD Workshops will address best practices, mid and end of year data review and learning walks. At risk students in grades 6-8 Grades 6-8 teachers 10/26-11/26/17 Window 2- 1/9/-2/9/18 Window 3- 5/8-6/8/18 Sept. 11, 2018-June 25, 2019 Grades 6-8 teachers, Literacy Coach, Administrative Cabinet RTI teachers for grades 6-8, Administrative Cabinet ThinkCERCA PD 9/24/18 Grades 6-8 teachers, principal, Literacy Coach, ThinkCERCA Consultant PD 10/29/18 PD 1/14/19 Learning Walks- 12/17/19 & 3/1/19 PD 6/10/19 ENL students are supported by push in and pull out services provided by the ENL teacher who will utilize data from ThinkCERCA to drive writing instruction. The ENL students follow the grade appropriate CCLS aligned curriculum. Grades 6-8 ENLs and SWD's Sept. 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 SWDs are serviced either in ICT classrooms or with SETSS services and their teachers are responsible for utilizing the General ed, ENL and special education teachers, Administrative Cabinet 2  ThinkCERCA data to improve and modify lessons with the general education teachers to improve instruction. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be updated on curriculum including ThinkCERCA, students' needs and strategies to promote collective responsibilities of learning. We will encourage parents to attend themed PTA meetings that are based on the varying major subjects, including a ThinkCERCA night which will showcase students writing abilities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Conceptual consolidation for use of multiple funding sources (e.g. TL, Title I, Title III, C4e) will be utilized to support professional development for teachers, the purchase of resources, and funding for before school, after-school and Saturday programs. Funding will also be utilized to support our continued participation in the Learning Partners Program.   A Literacy Coach and Math Coach will be funded this year.  Funding will be utilized to fund 4 professional development sessions/ web conferences with the ThinkCERCA consultants  Teacher per session will be available for Data Team and ELA Task Force members to analyze school data from benchmarks, and ThinkCerca reports. Supervisor per session will be available for facilitating data team meetings.  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 75% of targeted students will reach their mid year writing goal as measure by completing 3 Applied Writing Lessons in ThinkCERCA. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Reports from ThinkCERCA will be collected and examined by the Assistant Principals three times a year and then discussed with the Principal at the Accountability Checkpoint Meetings, for example: Usage reports for ELA, S.S. and Science teachers In addition, we will also look at the following: 3   Attendance logs and agendas from teacher cohort meetings will collected by administration to show how teachers are assessing student work and planning instruction aligned to CCSS and College and Career Readiness standards as well.  Trimester progress reports and trimester exam data will be discussed during Cabinet meetings ( which are held once a week) Student work samples from the beginning of the year, middle of the year and end of the year in ThinkCERCA  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A comparison of The School Quality Guide for 2017 showed that on the Quality of Professional Development we received a score of 3.0 (Meeting Target) , as opposed to last year where we received a score of 1.67 in the same category, showing an increase of 1.3. Teachers will be able to demonstrate commitment to students and their learning by having our teachers participate in school based professional development, reflect on their practice and become members of a school driven professional adult learning community. Teachers will be invited to take part in our Adult Learning Community spearheaded by our LPP team. In addition, we will be continuing with our partnerships with LPP host school, MS 137, partner school MS 226, as well as with our Ed. Consultant Ms. Clara Katz. Teachers will continue with inquiry based work that will focus upon identified trends in data collected. It is important for all administration to know the path of each teacher. Since each administrator observes every teacher one time, we have developed a system of sharing feedback on teachers to view prior to an observation. By looking at the previous feedback, we are then able to see if teachers are implementing next steps suggested by administration. Administration conducts weekly cabinet meetings but also meets at the end of each day to debrief on observations recently conducted. Conversations on establishing trends and patterns are also held during our weekly cabinet meetings to determine if we are meeting our Instructional Focus. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Through targeted Professional Learning and cycles of teacher observation that support elevation of teacher practice, by June 2019, 75% of students will meet their individual writing goals as measured by ThinkCERCA writing assessments in ELA and Social Studies. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  An individual writing goal will be created for each child ELA Teachers Sept. 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 Literacy Coach , Administration  To foster trust and collaboration, teachers will continue to implement a school wide intervisitation schedule to encourage the sharing of ideas related to argumentative writing and showcasing best practices using the ThinkCERCA Program.  School leaders and ELA & S.S. Task Forces will (vertical, horizontal, inquiry) look at data reports from ThinkCERCA to investigate the efficacy of instructional strategies used in the program, in order to, monitor student achievement. A comparison will be made between the ThinkCERCA baselines and mid and final writing benchmarks .  Administration will conduct informal observations with a focus on Component 3B: Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques to determine whether students are meeting the demands for evidence based discussion and writing.  A ThinkCERCA School Success Manager will facilitate PD training for ELA and S.S. Teachers on Mondays during Extended Day relating to data inquiry, teacher practice and utilization of the ThinkCERCA program. ELA and S.S. Teachers ELA and SS teachers Sept. 5 2018-June 26, 2019 Administration and teachers Sept. 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 ELA and SS teachers Literacy Coach, ELA Task Force, and Administration Administrative Cabinet, Literacy , ELA and SS Task Forces, ThinkCERCA Success Manager Administration ThinkCERCA School Success manager, Ed Consultant, Literacy Coach, Administration  Teachers of all high needs student subgroups will collaborate to assess the effectiveness of the curriculum Teachers of ELLs and SWDs ongoing Coaches 6 and instructional strategies, make appropriate adjustments, and identify additional scaffolds and supplements to meet the needs of all students. Admin Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Administration will work with the Literacy Coach, Parent Coordinator and ThinkCERCA Success Manager to implement the following:  Writing curriculum and instructional resources will be shared with parents during Parent workshops along with the rubrics used to evaluate student writing and strategies to support learning at home.  Teachers will utilize Parent Engagement time on Tuesday afternoons to communicate with parents addressing positive aspects of student work habits and areas of improvement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Conceptual consolidation for use of multiple funding sources will be utilized to support professional  development for teachers, the purchase of resources. Funding will also be used to support our continued participation in the Learning Partners Program. There are 3 Model Teachers.  Per session for the Data Team for analyzing school wide data.  A literacy coach and math coach will be funded this year.  Professional Development time will be scheduled during the extended days. An Ed Consultant will be funded to assist with professional development workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 60% of students will have met their individual writing goals as measured by students moving one rubric level on ThinkCERCA baseline and benchmark writing assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ThinkCERCA baseline and fall and spring benchmarks. 7  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to our most recent 2017 School Quality Guide, a review of the multiyear results of the Framework Element Scores showed that from 2017-2018 in the area of Strong Family-Community Ties, there was a .83 decrease from 2.83 to 2.00.  Only 48% of parents responded to the Learning Environment Survey this year, an increase of 10% from last year. A review of the survey questions on the School Quality Guide for the 2017-18 school year, showed the following data:  40% parent/guardians responded that since beginning of school year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer to support their school, a decrease of 3% from last year;  55% parent/guardians agreed that they are invited to visit classrooms and observe instruction, an increase of 12% from last year;  Our new CAAS systems, has allowed us to keep track of students' attendance and lateness. Our guidance counselors have also been working with students that are listed as chronically absent throughout the year. As a result our unofficial CA percentage this year is currently 15.3 which is a decrease of 3% from last years.  As a result, we hope to continue to strengthen and build strong family- community ties. We will continue to partner with the following CBOs “Neighborhood Improvement Association” for our after-school program, and Digital Delta for our artist in residence programs for our ENLs and SWDs. We will continue to do fundraisers for the New Utrecht Food Pantry, Leukemia and Lymphoma Society, Autism Speaks, Alex’s Lemonade Stand, Pediatric Cancer, and Walter Reid Hospital through the Rolling Thunder Organization.  Parent attendance at our Fall and Spring Arts Festivals has increased. Our auditorium is filled with parents and relatives who attend Vocal Music and Dance Shows.  PTA meetings will be held both in the morning and in the evening hours to accommodate those parents that work . Additionally funds will be used in order to promote English proficiency for parents through Adult ENL classes after school. Parents’ survey results showed that they want an opportunity to learn English. It is our goal to promote more understanding of what is taught at school to parents and how it impacts their children. As a result, we hope to increase attendance at our parent engagement opportunities.  While speaking with parents throughout the year about Skedula/PupilPath, our online grading system, they have expressed their satisfaction with their ability to view student grades and current averages for all courses throughout the marking period, not just at report card time and when progress reports are distributed to parents. Parents are able to monitor that students work has been submitted and communicated with each of their child’s teachers when concerns arise. Regular communication with parents via our school website, PupilPath, One Call Now phone messaging system, REMIND phone app and report cards were cited as an effective use of these systems of communication in our most recent Quality Review. 9   At I.S. 281, there is an expectation that teachers communicate regularly with parents/guardians. We encourage feedback from parents and community. It also showed that we scored 95% in Parent-Principal Trust area showing it is an area of strength for our school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Through targeted intervention and collaboration with families, 75% of targeted students will reduce their lateness by at least 5%, resulting in students achieving at least a 75% grade in the 4 major content areas. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Research-based instructional program, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change: Targeted parents and students Oct-2018-June 2019 During Parent Engagement Tuesdays Sept. 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 Attendance Teacher, Assistant Principal in charge of Attendance, Parent Coordinator, Deans Administration, Parent Coordinator, Sept. 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 ● Our full time attendance teacher will conduct workshops for teachers and parents on the importance of maintaining a good attendance and late record in school. ● To address trust, curriculum and instructional resources will be shared with parents of "targeted students" who are chronically late during workshops along with strategies to support learning at home.  As per school leadership team on June 12, 2018 it was voted upon that student attendance will be taken at period 1 as opposed to period 2.-  Teachers will conduct parent outreach on Tuesdays afternoons during Parent Engagement time to monitor the students with attendance and lateness issues to share student progress and reinforce positive work habits that can be supported at home. Targeted Parents All Teachers Administration, SLT Members All Teachers Sept. 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 Administration, Guidance Personnel, Deans 1   Student identification cards will be issued for all students in upcoming year to assist with tracking attendance, lunch data and bathroom data.  Promote good attendance and lateness through student/class awards.  Guidance counselors will utilize iLog to track students absences and lateness throughout the school year. Information on students targeted as "chronically absent/late" will be given to Grade Assistant Principals and the Principal All Students Teachers Guidance Counselors Sept. 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 Sept. 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 Sept. 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 Administration Administration Administration Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups:  Teachers of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-needs subgroups will collaborate with teachers during common planning time to identify modifications that can be made to lessons to ensure that all lessons are appropriately challenging and support student progress. Teacher Teams Ongoing throughout the year  The Specific Considerations for Teacher of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities will be utilized as a resource by teachers as well as by administration and coaches when developing learning sessions.  Promote punctuality though class competitions and student/class awards Sept. 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 Teachers Administration Administration, Coaches 2  Attendance Teacher and Guidance Counselor will meet with students targeted as chronically late or "at risk"  Deans will conduct lunch detention and after school Teachers detention for those targeted students that are "Chronically late". Strategies to promote stronger family and community ties and to increase parent involvement in support of improved student outcomes: ● Our PTA will sponsor movies throughout the school year allowing us to have several movie nights where families can have dinner and a movie and become closer to the parents in the community. Additional school wide events include the school carnival, Talent Showcases which highlight our various talents and the Spring Gala. As an incentive, students with "no latenesses" get free admission. ● Project Boost incentives for improved lateness will be given to students and their families ● Parents and Guardians will be provided with access to computer labs during parent conferences to set up their PupilPath accounts. Staff will offer instruction on how to utilize the system. Attendance teacher and guidance counselors will be present to meet with parents of students targeted 'at risk " for attendance and lateness. Sept. 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 Asst. Principal in charge of Attendance Sept. 2018-June 2019 Asst. Principals, Deans, Sept. 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 Sept. 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 Sept. 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 Administration PTA, parent coordinator, administration, teachers Administrator in charge of Project Boost, Project Boost Representatives,Parent Coordinator Attendance Teacher, Guidance Personnel Deans PTA Officers Parent Coordinator During all P/T Conferences Computer Tech Teachers, Parent Coordinator School Leadership Team, Administration Sept. 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 Administration Targeted students and their families 3  ● Parent Coordinator organizes workshops for parents to maintain a strong link between parents and the school and to build trust amongst all stakeholders. Parents and Guardians Sept. 5, 2018-June 26, 2019  Teachers will discuss the instructional strategies and routines that they are implementing in their classroom during Parent -Teacher Conferences and Open School Nights. Parents and Guardians Parent coordinator All Teaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. NIA, Chancellor's Learning Partner Program, LEAP, Teen Thursday's, Mighty Milers, Project Boost, The Hour of Code, Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Conceptual consolidation for use of multiple funding sources (e.g. TL, Title I, Title III, C4e) will be utilized to support professional development for teachers, the purchase of resources, and funding for before school, after-school and Saturday programs. Funding will also be utilized to support our continued participation in the Teacher Incentive Fund.   DYCD funding will allow for the afterschool program, NIA, to be funded.  Remuneration for full time Attendance Teacher  Project Boost Grant from Senator Savino ($12,967) will be used for the purchasing of incentives for students (good attendance, no lateness, most improved in lateness) and their families such as tickets to Broadway Shows, sporting events, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 4  By February 2019, 75% of targeted students will earn passing grades of at least a 65% in their 4 core content areas. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The following instruments will be used to measure and assess progress toward this goal:  Attendance logs on Tuesday's during parent engagement afternoons, PTA meetings,  Data from skedula/pupilpath will be reviewed by Assistant Principals to measure usage , access, and student progress in all 4 core courses will be presented to Principal during their Accountability Checkpoint Meetings, held 3x a year. iLog data from guidance counselors will be examined by Asst. Principals during Accountability Checkpoint Meetings   Review of Progress Reports before each Trimester Marking Period by Administration . Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students are identified based on their performance level on the previous year’s state assessment, growth percentiles, classroom grades, and teacher recommendation. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group pull out program, small group instruction, peer tutoring program, Saturday School During the school day, after-school program, Saturday program These programs consist of teacher created lessons, assignments and activities designed to provide individualized instruction in areas designated to show a need/weakness. Based upon data analysis and needs assessments, teachers recommend students for these tutoring classes. Students of all performance levels can be identified for remediation services. The following area plethora of resources and materials that are used: NYS CCLS Ready, NYS Workout, NYS Countdown Coach, past ELA state exams, rubrics, predictive exams, benchmark exams, diagnostic exams, essay writing, reading fictional selections, Thinkcerca,nonfiction text, newspapers, historical fiction novels , Writing Matters,and iReady web based programs 6 Small group pull out program, small group instruction, peer tutoring program, Saturday School During the school day, after school program, Saturday School Mathematics Students are identified based on their performance level on the previous year’s state assessment, growth percentiles, classroom grades, and teacher recommendation. designed to increase math and literacy skills, Wilson decoding/reading, encoding/spelling and reading comprehension program, and utilizing the internet These programs consist of teacher created lessons, assignments and activities designed to provide individualized instruction in areas designated to show a need/weakness. Based on data analysis and needs assessments, teachers recommend students for these small group classes. Students of all performance levels can be identified for an AIS or tutoring class. The following are a plethora of resources and materials that are used during AIS programs: NYS CCLS Ready books, past Math state exams, rubrics, pre/post assessments, AMSCO prep books, NYS Coach books, NYS Workout books, IXL, iReady and Mathletics, web based programs designed to increase math skills, Boardworks online resources, Schoolnet 7 Science- small group, whole class, and one-to-one instruction During the school day, after school program - small group, whole class, and one-to-one instruction During the school day and after school program Science Students are identified based on classroom grades and teacher recommendation. Social Studies Students are identified based on classroom grades and teacher recommendation. These programs consist of teacher created lessons, assignments and activities designed to provide individualized instruction in areas designated to show a need/weakness. Based upon data analysis and needs assessments, teachers recommend students for these small group AIS classes during Extended Days. The following are a plethora of resources and materials that are used during AIS programs: Baseline assessments, rubrics, predictive exams, diagnostic exams, Regents review books, mini labs, Boardworks, escience Achieve 3000 and utilizing the internet. These programs consist of teacher created lessons, assignments and activities designed to provide individualized instruction in areas designated to show a need/weakness. Based upon data analysis and needs assessments, teachers recommend students for these small group AIS classes. The following are a plethora of resources and materials that are used during AIS Programs; Schoolnet, rubrics, Baseline 8  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students are identified based on classroom grades and teacher recommendation., Teacher or parent concern regarding social, emotional functioning, or student experiences a crisis during the course of the school day Assessments, predictive exams, diagnostic exams, essay writing, reading fictional selections, nonfiction text, newspapers, primary source documents, historical speeches, historical fiction novels and utilizing the internet Guidance- Individual and group counseling in areas such as: goal setting, bullying, drug-prevention, coping skills, family issues, study skills, interpersonal concerns, self-esteem issues, anger management, classroom behavior, attendance improvement, high school applications, Utilizing Steve Covey’s “7 Habits of Highly Effective Teens”. School Psychologist- initiate resources provided for suspicion of children with learning delays; suggest techniques and methods implemented for children who are exhibiting “at risk” academic delays; recommend strategies to address academic difficulties; suggest modified instructional strategies for children “at risk” Guidance- during and after school School Psychologist- during the school day Social Worker- during the school day School Nurse- during the school day Guidance- one to one, small and large groups according to activity. Crisis intervention is generally provided on an individual as needed basis. At risk counseling can be provided in a small group setting or School Psychologist- one to one Social Worker- one-to-one School Nurse- one-to-one 9  Social Worker- provide parent education including parent rights about special education, the special education process, and special education services. Conducts social history interviews with parents for initial referrals. School Nurse- teach, administer and monitor medication, as well as provide counseling support for students with chronic conditions; management of insulin dependent diabetic with continual insulin therapy 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 24 STH. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 1. We follow Chancellor's Regulation A-780 with regards to Students in Temporary Housing. This includes the following: a. Enrollment Assistance by family assistant b. Free transportation c. Receive free school meals d. Assistance with immunization e. STH funds are set aside in Galaxy f. Funds to be used for school supplies, activities, uniform and trips. 2. All Guidance staff will receive training from the STH point person on the I.S. 281 Safety Plan/ Consolidation Plan regarding the McKinney-Vento Act and appropriate supports. 3. As with all students, STH and their parents/guardians are provided with access to Skedula/PupilPath to review their child's progress with regards to homework, classwork, projects, tests/quizzes, class participation, etc. 4. Opportunities for STH to participate in small group meetings around confidence building ( faciltated by I.S. 281 social worker). 1  Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. During the Recruitment and Hiring Process we: 1. Contact our Brooklyn South Borough HR Director, who does background checks for appropriate license and certification for vacancies 2. Careful attention is given to matching teacher qualifications with the needs of the school 3. Attend hiring fairs through the NYC DOE 4. Post vacancies on the Open Market System 5. View Potential Candidates on New Teacher Finder 6. Collect resumes and review them throughout the year 7. Hold First Level and Second Level group interview with teachers and administrators on the interviewing panel 8. Conduct demonstration lessons wherein candidates teach a lesson in person, which is observed by administration 9. Assign a building based mentor and a "buddy teacher" to the newly hired teacher. These staff members serve as instructional supports for new teachers in planning, understanding school procedures and to address other questions as they arise. Mentoring interactions are logged using the NYCDOE Mentor Tracking System. 10 Provide ongoing professional learning through departmental study groups facilitated by assistant principals and our LPP Team, along with select outside consultants. Professional learning has focused on the Danielson Framework for Effective Teaching, Understanding the instructional shifts in Literacy and Math, Webb's Depth of Knowledge, Hess' Cognitive Rigor Matrix and curriculum mapping. 11. Provide additional supports based on teachers' individual strengths and areas of challenge. Teachers intervisit other classrooms and submit reflections on best practices and support new teacher growth. 12. Teachers are assigned to teacher teams to analyze student work, share best practices, and align assignments and assessments with class data. Teacher teams meet a minimum of three times each week. 13. New teacher meetings with the Principal are held to support understanding of school mission, data, culture and expected outcome, as they all relate to day to day pedagogy and long term planning and practice. 3  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Ensuring that 100% of our teachers are highly qualified by: 1. Providing Tuition Reimbursement incentives when appropriate and permitted 2. Assigning all new staff to our school with Teacher Mentors 3. Providing instructional support through individualized teacher training and professional learning communities. 4. New Teacher Workshops 5. As an LPP school, we provide support for teachers with our Model Teachers 6. Weekly Monday afternoon teacher collaboration sessions 7. Sending faculty to workshops conducted by personnel at the citywide and district level on ELA expectations across Content Areas, the new Passport Social Studies Curriculum, targeted special education professional learning opportunities around co-teaching models, IEP writing and implementation of multiple entry points, targeted assistance for ENLS on building of academic language and the New Language Progressions and sessions on working with and monitoring of at-risk students. 8. Using Curriculum, observation results, feedback and conversations from teachers, and the school goals outlined in the CEP to inform the choice of focus, topics, and delivery, as well as, the personnel best suited to facilitate the professional learning sessions. 9. Utilizing a PD Committee composed of administration, Literacy Coach, LPP Team which includes a teacher from each content area and i Model Teachers,, who meet monthly to discuss building, departmental, and individual professional learning needs. Professional learning topics include integrating writing and literacy into the content areas with a focus on strategies to engage all learners, including ENLs, students with disabilities, and other subgroups identified by analyzing the Framework for Great Schools Report and our NYS Report Card. We plan to continue implementing professional learning opportunities to develop a coherent set of instructional practices around our 2017-18 instructional focus as we continue to utilize ,ThinkCerca, Newsela, the Learning Partners Program Intervisitations/Meetings, and the BFSC professional learning workshops on writing in Grade 7. 10. Developing professional learning sessions to support teachers in implementing strategies to overcome areas of challenge demonstrated by students and to support engaging and rigorous instruction. 11. Attending district professional learning and then turnkey the information to their colleagues in small-group meetings and during teacher team common planning. Feedback forms and staff interest surveys are utilized to inform future professional learning topics and delivery. 12. Applying deeper understanding and logistical awareness regarding Danielson Framework from our JESA meetings to team norming and observation practices 13. Learning Partner visits immerse teacher and leadership participants in research based inquiry driven professional learning around two essential focus areas ( Collaborative Teachers and Effective School Leadership) several times across the 2017-18 school year. 14. Building capacity and teacher leadership through an instructional cabinet that meets once a month throughout the school year with a focus on best practices, coherence of school mission across classrooms, school environment and collaboration on school initiatives across subject areas. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources 4  Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. During Teacher Collaboration on Monday afternoons, teacher teams meet by grade and subject area and create common assessments, such as baseline, pre and post assessments, quarterly exams which allows them to review the data to adjust unit and lesson planning and surface the instructional multiple entry points necessary for all students to achieve the objectives of rigorous tasks. Before administering these exams, teachers must submit them to their subject area administrator for approval. It is only upon their approval that the exams can be Xeroxed. Administration collects the results of the common assessments and reviews the data holistically to get an over-arching view of school progress across grades and subject areas. Subject area teachers also conduct an item skills analysis. Teacher teams also examine tasks and expectations through EngageNY, iReady, MOSL and NYS exams to inform decisions on the assessments and backwards planning. To ensure that teachers effectively use assessment results to improve instruction and respond to student needs, professional development around Danielson Framework Domain 3 is embedded in the expectations of Monday afternoon professional learning work. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount 5  each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 969,859.00 0 30,030.00 0 9,154,687.00 X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 6   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Joseph B. Cavallaro I. S. 281 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Joseph B. Cavallaro I.S. 281 will support parents and families of Title I students by: 8  ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 9  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Joseph B. Cavallaro I.S. 281 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 0  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; ● providing parents with access to an online program (PupilPath.com) to keep them informed of their child’s daily academic progress and performance, as well as, school calendar of events and REMIND texts Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 1  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities We, as parents, will support our children’s learning in the following ways: ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 2  ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities We , as students, will share the responsibility to improve our academic achievement and achieve the State’s high standards. Specifically, we will: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time (7:50 a.m.); ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn; Record all assignments in my Student/Parent Homework Planner; ● wear clothing that conforms to our dress code; ● respect the property of others and all school property; ● Use acceptable language at all times; ● Not leave the building without permission and will not bring or allow intruders into the building; ● Follow the NYC DOE discipline code of conduct; ● Adhere to all safety regulations ● Give to my parents/guardians all notices and information received from the principal every day; ● Maintain their self respect and will exhibit respectful behavior toward all staff members and fellow students; 3  ● Not bring ipods, MP3 players, electronic games, cards or anything not related to school work into the building. 4 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: The ENL Afterschool Preparatory Academy at I.S.281 will run forty-seven -three hour sessions on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:15-5:15 p.m. beginning October 17, 2018 and ending April 18, 2019 servicing 90-120 ENL students. Two ENL certified teachers and 2 content teachers will use ESL methodologies and instructional strategies. These teachers have also been trained in Margarita Calderon's Rigor Program. Since there are no other school funded after school programs, a supervisor will also be available to provide support. The program targets ENLs, in Grade 6 ,7 & 8, who scored in Performance Level 1 on the NYS ELA exam. Teachers will provide small group instruction to ENL students on improving reading comprehension skills, writing skills and phonics skills. The students will practice and apply reading strategies-with a specific focus on comprehension skills and strategies, vocabulary instruction designed for specific application to content area reading, building academic language, writing, fluency and decoding phonics. To this aim, a variety of materials, will be used to assist the students in language acquisition, the development of reading comprehension strategies and writing skills. Each of our ENL student. For those students who elected not to participate in the ENL After-school Preparatory Academy, they have the option of either signing up for NIA After-school ( 2:15-5:15 Mondays through Fridays) , where they will receive remediation in ELA and ENL strategies. They may also attend Family Literacy After-school sessions held once a week from 2:30 till 4:30 p.m. Each after-school student will be in attendance from 2:15 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. There will be two classes that will be comprised as follows: Group A will include only Entering and Emerging Students while Group B will include the Transitioning and Expanding students. Instruction will take place in the form of a blended learning model with one ENL teacher in one room and one ELA teacher in the other. The ENL teacher will teach during Rigor time. The ELA teacher will instruct during ThinkCerca time.. During iReady time, teachers will work with two groups of students who require small group instruction while the rest are on the computer. Each after-school teacher will maintain his/her class records including student attendance and student progress. Any notification about the program to parents will be sent home in the preferred languages. The schedule breakdown will take place for each session: 2:15-3:00 Rigor 3:00-3:45 Think Cerca 3:45- 4:30 iReady/Mindplay 4:30-5:15 Parental outreach and/or Professional Development ThinkCerca is a thematic-based ELA curriculum that provides leveled informational and literary texts, is aligned to CCSS provides students with direct instruction on literacy skills and concepts. It allows students to develop argumentation skills. With ThinkCERCA, students build upon the CER method to construct explanations, and communicate information. It provides students with a common language for teaching literacy-specifically writing-across English language arts, social studies, math or science. Instruction will be provided in English and be individualized to allow teachers to model argumentative writing strategies. The ELA teacher will rotate groups so that all students receive writing development from an appropriately 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information certified ELA teacher each time the program meets. We hope to service this population with the hopes of moving those students who take the NYS exams one proficiency level and those who are taking the NYSESLAT to move from Entering/Emerging ENLs to Transitioning/Expanding to Commanding on the Reading and Writing portion of the exam. iReady is a web-based, differentiated instruction solution designed to reach a school's entire population including English Language Learners. It uses non-fiction content and real-time Lexile assessment. It steadily increases students' ability to read, comprehend, apply and communicate information derived from complex text-prerequisites for success in school and beyond graduation. It uses Lexiles to differentiate instruction together with a proven approach to improving fluency, comprehension, vocabulary, writing and critical thinking. It also provides lessons for teachers to work with students during small group instruction providing them with extension activities. This is our second year with iReady and we have seen gains in Lexile levels in our English Language Learners. It is of no cost to the Title III program and utilizing it on Saturday to culminate the day's instruction would benefit our students. Professional development is also provided to teacher three times a year by the iReady Implementation Specialist. Mindplay is a virtual reading program that guides students through lessons and activities that are based on sound learning principles and motivate students to succeed. The program assesses students' skills and determines their gaps in ability. It provides direct and diversified instruction with targeted feedback to increase and improve those skills. It utilizes a multisensory approach to instruction. Remediation lessons and activities for struggling students needing additional practice are also provided as it monitors student progress for students. Each child gets a prescriptive reading plan which includes Mastery components(phonics/phonemic awareness, grammar for meaning) and Proficiency components (fluency comprehension, vocabulary). The program adapts and adjust according to the unique needs of each student. These programs will be used but will be at no cost to Title III. Subgroup data from the 2018 NYS ELA is not available yet. We anticipate an increase in the 2018 NYS ELA exam scores for the ELL subgroup since results released for ALL Students indicate that 52.3% students are proficient in ELA, an increase of 13.3%. A comparison of data from the 2017 & 2018 NYSESLAT data shows that out of 289 tested students the following: There was an increase of 1 % in students performing at a Level 1 Entering from 5% to 6% There was a decrease of 3% in students performing at Level Emerging from 12% to 9% There was a no increase students performing at Level 3 Transitioning from 22% to 22% There was a decrease of 2 % in students performing at Level 4 Expanding from 45% to 43% There was an increase of 5% in students performing at Level 5 Commanding from 16% to 21% Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider 7  Planning&nbsp;Meeting with ThinkCERCA&nbsp;Consultant- 8/31/18 Initial&nbsp;Refresher Training- 9/24/18 ( focusing on Integrating Learning&nbsp;Walks - 12/17/18 and 3/11/19 End&nbsp;of the Year Growth Review- 6/10/19 Best&nbsp;Practices PD - 10/29/18&nbsp; (Blended Learning Strategies) Mid&nbsp;Year Data Review- 1/14/19 ( Strategies for Using Data to Drive Protocols, Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: The Professional Development Component will be provided by a consultant from ThinkCERCA who will provide a comprehensive professional development program for ELA and ENL teachers, incorporating on-site coaching and modeling of lessons. Additional professional development will be provided by our Literacy Coach and our Assistant Principal in charge of ELA and ENL, who will be attending ThinkCERCA training in the summer and in November of 2018. Professional development will include 3 on site visits by the ThinkCERCA consultant and the Literacy Coach at no cost to the program. Professional Development will also be held on Mondays during Collaborative time from 2:30-3:30 and facilitated by the Assistant Principal supervising ESL/ELA , Literacy Coach and the ThinkCERCA consultant and will be held on Monday Afternoons as per UFT contract focusing on the following topics: · · ThinkCERCA&nbsp;with Curriculum, Grading and Feedback Protocols) · · Accountability, Team Meetings · · In addition from 4:30-5:15 p.m. teachers will be focusing on looking at the different reports from ThinkCERCA, Mindplay, iReady to determine how students are performing. They will then compile data sheets on each of the students which will be then used to notify parents how they are doing. The first Wednesday of each month, teachers will meet with the Title III Supervisor for professional development sessions from 4:30-5:15 for a duration of 45 minutes. Professional Development will include the following: Oct. 17, 2018- Diagnostic Testing Feb. 6, 2019- Getting Ready for the NYS ELA Nov. 7- MindPlay Professional Development March 6, 2019- Getting Ready for the NYS Math Dec. 5- ThinkCerca Professional Development April, 10, 2019- Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT Jan. 2, 2019- iReady Professional Development Teachers will also be responsible for signing up for the Adult Learning Community which is conducted by our Literacy Coach and LPP Team and meets once a month to discuss educational strategies to implement in the classroom. The Literacy Coach, ThinkCERCA consultant and the Assistant Principal in charge of ENL/ELA will maintain attendance and agenda sheets from each of the workshops. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider 8  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities · how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: The activities that we provide allow parents to bond with their children academically as well as socially. Our Orientation Evenings provide us with feedback about after-school programs in which they want their children to participate. Interpretation is provided at parent meetings by school staff to promote communication between home and school. When needed, letters are provided for parents in their native language. As per the new UFT contract, Tuesdays has also been devoted to parent engagement activities from 2:20-3:25. Parent involvement for our ELLs includes the following: 1. Parent Teacher Conference Workshops on Pupil Path- 9/20/18 2. Workshops by Parent Coordinator and ESL Coordinator, Ms. Yip- 10/30/18 3. Understanding the NYSESLAT Parent Report by ESL Coordinator- 11/27/18 4. How to navigate the iready/Mindplay/ThinkCERCA sites - 1/8/19 5. How to Use BrainPopESL - 2/12/19 6. How to Track Your Child's Progress on PupilPath.-3/26/19 The Parent Coordinator will maintain all records including agendas, attendance sheets, and translated copies of letters/invitations in the parents' preferred language. The NIA afterschool program will conduct monthly Family Fun Events open to all students & parents which will include the following: October- Halloween Movie Night- 10/25/18 @ 6:30 p.m. March: Zumba Night- 3/19/19 @ 6:30 p.m. November: Paint and Punch Night- 11/20/18 @ 6:30p.m. April: Kids vs. Parents Sports Events-4/16/19 @ 6:30 p.m. December: Cavallaro's Holiday Festival - 12/5/18@ 5:30 p.m. May: Movie Night-5/21/19 @ 6:30 p.m. January: Family Fun Night- 1/17/19 @ 6 p.m. June: Farewell Tea Party & Breakfast- 6/18/19 @ 9:30 a.m. February: Cavallaro's Got Talent- 2/12/19 @ 6 p.m. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 9  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 21 School Name Joseph B. Cavallaro Borough Brooklyn School Number 281 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Maria Bender Coach Fatema Mohassib ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Helen Yip Teacher/Subject Area Valerie Sarcuni Teacher/Subject Area Anna Dunlavey Related-Service Provider Daneen Weingarten Superintendent Isabel DiMola Assistant Principal Maria Delfini Coach Fran Catania School Counselor Danielle Thompson Parent Maureen Maxwell Parent Coordinator Christine DiMatteo Field Support Center Staff Member Ronny Rodriguez Other (Name and Title) Yu Palumbo DL teacher C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1342 1 Total number of ELLs 201 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 14.98%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Mandarin Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) Program TBE TBE TBE DL Lang. 0 0 DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 2 2 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 4 0 0 4 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools used to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs includes an analysis of the reading and writing sections of the NYSITELL, SPANISH LAB, NYSESLAT and an ELA Item Analysis, if available. We also look at previous years' NYSESLAT scores to determine yearly progress. Additionally, teachers informally assess students literacy skills on a dialy basis through classroom observations and writing samples. (The data shows that due to an influx of new sixth and seventh grade students at the end of last year, our number of beginner students in the seventh and eighth grade has increased from last year. However, their ELA performance has improved slightly since last year. The majority of our students scored a Level 1 last year. This past year, we saw an increase of students performing at a Level 2 in our ELL population.) We will continue to target our Level 1 ELL students and low performing students on the NYSESLAT for academic intervention. Those students will be invited to afterschool/Extended Day ESL Literacy Programs. Additionally, those students who will be taking the ELA for the first time will be identified and invited to attend these programs. 2  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers meet in teams during Monday Collaboration time during Extended Day as per the UFT contract. Common planning time is also programmed into teachers' schedules. Every Monday afternoon during Extended Day ELL teachers cycle through each of the content areas and meet to discuss curriculum and any modifications needed for ELLs. Professional Collaboration Logs are collected the last Wednesday of each month by subject area Assistant Principals and reviewed by the Principal, which are then returned to teacher teams with comments,questions or concerns. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs throughout the year, making programmatic and instructional adjustments when necessary. In addition, teachers, administrators and instructional teams meet regulary to assess the current status of programs. In terms of data, the NYSESLAT data is used to determine success of program. Are the students making progress and/or testing out? Are we as a school meeting the state targets for progress and proficiency? We determine if the ELL subgroup made AYP in ELA, AMO or Safe Harbor Target. ELL teachers meet with content area teachers to help target instruction and differentiate. ELL teachers meet often to share successful lessons with each other and collaborate with common content teachers. Formal and informal assessments are given throughout the year to gage student achievement. We set high standards for our ELL students and expect them to be proficient within three years. Our subgroup data confirms our success in that area. Many of our ELL students who are not proficient in three years are our Special Education population. We addressed this deficiency by hiring an additional ESL teacher to work specifically with that population in small groups. Periodic Assessments and end of year state tests are also reviewed for trends within the ESL population. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teachers are provided with any data that they may require by either going to the Data Specialist or asking the Data Team. Data is also frequently reviewed by the administration each trimester. Teachers are also involved in Cycles of Inquiry which requires them to utilize data to address their particular area of focus. There are 3-4 inquiry cycles conducted per school year. We also have two coaches (Literacy and Math) that can also offer support and assist the ESL teachers with the interpretation of the data and next steps. . 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The school has implemented a co-teaching program for the 2017-2018 school year . There are four 6th grade co-teaching and/or push-in classes, four 7th grade co-teaching and/or push-in classes, and five 8th grade co-teaching and/or push-in classes, which include ICT and self-contained classes at each grade level. To address the needs of our students, most are placed by language proficiency level based on NYSESLAT and NYSITELL. There are 201 ENL students placed in these classes. There are 92 in Grade 6, 86 in Grade 7, and 63 in Grade 8. Out of the 201 ELL students, 9 are also identified as SIFE (Students with Interrupted Formal Education), 160 are identified as Newcomers, and 20 are identified as Long-Term ENLs. We have 61 ELL students who have been receiving services for 4-6 years. For each English Language Learner who scores below specified levels of performance on the annual English language proficiency assessment, the school provides additional support services to provide the student in the form of two additional RTI classes where they will receive either remediation in Reading or Math utilizing the iReady online assessment program from Curriculum Associates or iXL Math and iXL ELA. These assessment practices allow teachers to monitor students' learning so that they may adjust instruction accordingly, provide students with timely and useful feedback, and encourage students to reflect on their own thinking and learning. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns across proficiency levels on the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL indicate that 24 ENL students are Commanding, 110 are expanding, 50 are Transitioning, 12 are Entering and 37 are Emerging. The data across proficiency levels and grades reveal that students at higher proficiency levels tend to achieve higher scores on other indicators. 3  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our Data Specialist and Data Team, consisting of a Literacy and Math Coach, interprets the data and distributes item skills analysis and examines data for any trends. We also have a consultant who provides us with data reports on all students and identifies the "slippables and pushables" This information is then distributed to the Administration first, who reviews it and then to teachers. Administrators and coaches then conduct data meetings with teachers to discuss individual data areas of strengths and areas for focus. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In freestanding ENL students will receive a combination of pull out services with a certified ESL provider and moving forward with content based ENL with services provided by dually certified providers or co taught by certified content area teachers and certified ENL teacher together. Classes generally travel together except in the case of ELA. At those times classes are parallel programmed so the ELLs receive ENL and EPs receive ELA instruction. Proficiency levels are mixed for content area classes. For ENL, entering and emerging students will be programmed together, transitioning students will form another group and expanding and commanding students will be programmed together b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. In September, 2015 we will have a Dual Language Mandarin Chinese DL class. This 50/50-2 way program will receive ENL in their self contained setting provided by the bilingually certified Chinese teacher. The class will include all levels of ENL students who will receive differentiated instruction. Language is taught through content areas as well as through literacy. The program is designed to have students spend 50% of their instructional time with a target language immersion teacher who uses on ly the target language for teaching Math and Social Studies. The remaining part of the day is spent with teachers who instruct only in English which is how they are instructed in ELA and Science classes. The primary language acquisition goals of the dual language program is the development of grade-level-appropriate bilingual and bi-literate academic skills in both English and the target language of Mandarin for all students. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All ELL students receive ENL services with a sophistication program using either a collaborative co-teaching and push-in model. All general education ELL students are grouped by grade level and then further broken down into homogenous groups based on NYSESLAT proficiency level. Flexible scheduling is implemented to ensure that students receive the mandated numbers of ENL periods without losing content instruction. In addition they receive at 8 periods per week of ELA instruction from a certified Common Branches, Language Arts or Special Education teacher in their grade level class. The CR Part 154 instructional unit requirement for ELLs mandates that The CR Part 154 instructional unit requirement for ELLs mandates that Entering ELLs receive 360 minutes of instruction per week. 180 minutes in ENL and 180 minutes in ENL/ELA. Emerging ELLs must receive 360 minutes of instruction per week. 90 minutes in ENL and 90 minutes ENL or integrated ENL/ Content area and 90 minutes in ENL. Transitioning ELLs must receive 180 minutes per week: 90 minutes in ENL/ELA and 90 minutes in ENl or 4  integrated ENL/ Content Area. Expanding ELLs must receive 180 minutes of instruction per week in ENL/ELA. Commanding Ells must receive 90 minutes of instruction per week of integrated ENL in ELA or content Area. We are in compliance with these requirements. Students receive explicit instruction using a collaborative co-teaching model. Our Entering and Emerging students are provided with at least 360 minutes of ENL instruction .Our Transitioning and Expanding students are provided with at least 180 minutes of ENL instruction a week and our Commanding students receive 90 minutes of instruction per week.Students do not receive formal Native Language Instruction. In the DL program students will also received the mandated combination of stand alone ENL and integrated ENL within their self contained setting. One unit of NLA will also be provided by the bilingually certified Mandarin instructor. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In our DL Program, the content areas of Science and ELA are delivered by a certified ENL teacher who will provide instruction in English. In the content areas of Math and Social Studies, a certified Dual Language teacher will provide instruction in Mandarin. Our teachers provide instruction to regular sized groups and reduced groups of ENL students. It is conducted in English only using intensive ENL methodologies. Native language is supported with bilingual classroom libraries in our ESL and AIS classrooms. Our ENL teachers provide our students with the basic instruction to help them learn skills needed to meet the requirements for the 6th, 7th, and 8th Grade ELA assessment test. Our Math, Language Arts, Science and Social Studies teachers provide our students with the basic instruction to help them learn skills needed to meet the requirements for NYS assessment tests. Content area teachers focus on vocabulary to expedite content knowledge. We implement the New York State ESL Standards in students' academic language development program and regular content area classes. These standards specifically address listening, speaking, reading and writing in English for information and understanding, expression, critical analysis and evaluation, social interaction, knowledge and understanding. The ENL teachers provide supplementary instruction to reinforce those skills learned in these classes. Sufficient lessons in reading and writing skills are ongoing during the year. ENL teachers assist classroom teachers in individualizing classroom instruction for ENL students. Additionally, ENL students are encouraged to attend during mandated extended time for assistance in math and language arts. Native Language Arts is supported in all classrooms using peer translation, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, Google Translator and teacher translation when available. The academic program for our ENL students is based on periods-per-week in subject area classes. Each period is approximately 45 minutes in length. ENL students receive the following instructional periods: ENL – tbd by proficiency levels ELA – 8 periods MATH – 8 periods SCI – 5 periods SS – 5 periods ENL students have access to the various aspects of the Comprehensive Approach to Literacy and Comprehensive Approach to Balanced Mathematics Curricula along with the use of Code-X, and iReady. We will continue using Milestones, which is a scripted curriculum. It comes with student textbooks, workbooks and media. It addresses the four modalities assessed on the NYSESLAST and includes embedded test prep strategies and practice for the NYS ELA assessment. Sufficient lessons in reading and writing skills are ongoing throughout the school year. All ENL students go to Science/Social Studies/Math as a homogeneous group with teachers trained to work with the ENL population. Students have been placed in classes based on their NYSESLAT performance levels. Entering and Emerging level students are placed in a pull out class. Instruction is delivered in English with appropriate native language support when necessary to improve basic comprehension of vocabulary and directions as well as to activate students' prior knowledge to help them make connections with the new content being delivered. Content area instructional materials are utilized in the education of our ELL students as well. Instruction uses content area taught with a whole language approach fostering speaking, reading, writing and listening to strengthen language development and learn the content subject area. 5  In Social Studies and Science, the teachers utilize the Access History and Science books which are modified to allow ENLs to access content on an appropriate level. In Math, manipulatives and hands-on activities are used. Content area teachers of ELL students are scheduled to ensure common preparatory periods so they can identify and strategize to address specific student needs. Additionally, ENL teachers are invited to participate in these common planning sessions so they can suggest alternative methodologies which would improve content delivery and comprehension in the classroom. ENL teachers also collaborate with one another and content area teachers on inquiry teams during Collaboration Time on Monday afternoons. ENL teachers assist classroom teachers in individualizing classroom instruction for ENL students. Students also take part in the Extended Day Program which provides them enrichment in English and Mathematics for 50 minutes twice a week after school. The NYSESLAT is given in the spring to determine the eligibility of continued entitlement to ENL services for students in grades 6-8. The test is aligned with New York State English as a Second Language Standards and determines entitlement of services and analysis of students’ English language proficiency. ATS reports such as RLAT are used to help target student instruction effectively and identify our groups of ENLs, in particular, our Commanding and Former ENLs to ensure that teachers continue supporting them with appropriate scaffolding where needed. Students continue to receive ENL services and testing accommodations for two years after reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT. ENL students are afforded equal access to all school programs. ENL students are identified in RESI and placed in appropriate morning program classes. The parent coordinator actively reaches out to parents of ENL students to encourage the students to participate in all after school programs. We also have a dedicated ENL after-school program that all ENL students are invited to participate in. Joseph B. Cavallaro I.S. 281 also hosts a yearly celebration of our diverse cultures during Respect for All Week which ENL students are always included. The rationale and goal behind this is to support the students social, emotional, and intellectual development, as well as improve learning outcomes and foster engagement in the school community. The smaller student to teacher ratio provided in after school programs gives the students a more focused support and greater opportunity for remediation, which supports their engagement with grade-level appropriate texts during the school day. Our ENL students take part in several after school programs and supplemental services supported through Title III and Title I funding. We have an academic intervention after school program specified for ENL Students. The students in this program are grouped by proficiency and serviced by an ENL certified teacher. In addition to their regular ENL hours, students will be pulled by a reading specialist who focuses on first-time test takers to provide support and instruction of skills necessary to succeed on the ELA assessment. For the past several years we have been fortunate to participate in the Arts for English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities Program that funds arts partnerships that serve a diverse group of student participants where they have the opportunity to participate in a unique program that provides arts education. Joseph B. Cavallaro I.S. 281 utilizes a variety of instructional resources. All teachers of ENL students use visual stimuli, flexible groupings and a hands- on approach to make the content accessible for our ENL students. In Social Studies, the teachers utilize the Access History books which are modified to allow ENLs to access content on an appropriate level. Access History is used by Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding students. In Math, manipulatives and hands-on activities are used by all subgroups of ENLs. We offer an extended day program and after school programs for all our ENL students. We are also implementing Milestones, which ensures that students are mastering skills and standards before being introduced to new ones. This research-based approach will provide language- acquisition and content knowledge crucial for academic success. Technology is used to make curriculum accessible to our ENL students. This gives the students visual context clues and aids, while reinforcing their listening skills. Teachers use teacher-student created visual aids, such as charts, pictures, and graphic representations, creating a print-rich environment to provide students with alternative and supportive ways to comprehend content. Additionally, many of the content area teachers use SMART boards, which help ENLs to visualize and comprehend the content. LCD projectors are also used to display PowerPoint presentations. Entering level students are encouraged to write in their native language so that the teachers get a clearer understanding of their level of comprehension and ability in their native language. This is then translated into English using Google translation tools. All student writing is valued and used as an entry point to motivate student engagement and participation. ENL classes have been scheduled in the computer labs to support the use of Destination Reading and Earobics computer programs designed to improve speaking, listening, reading and writing abilities. We have also designated a computer cart with laptops and iPads for our ENL classes to use (from Title I grant). 6  Content area instructional materials are utilized in the education of our ENL students as well. We use Access History, manipulatives in Math, and glossaries in all content areas. This is used in conjunction with the language support materials to give our ENL students access to content knowledge as they acquire English skills. All materials utilized by our ENL students are high interest, but tailored to their reading level and include age appropriate content. Additionally, native language libraries have been provided through the Office of ENLs and NYC DOE. Before the start of the school year, we host a parent orientation. All parents, including those of ENL students are invited and encouraged to participate in this. We also complete an inventory of materials to ensure that they are available. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We have highly qualified ENL staff that speak the multiple languages of the ENL students at IS 281. All care and attention is paid to their careful evaluation throughout the school year in home languages.During the home language identification process, students are interviewed in English and their home language when necessary to assess their level of comprehension. Once eligibility is established, Spanish speaking students are administered the Spanish LAB-R as an initial evaluation of their native language. An RLER report in ATS is run to determine an ENL student's home language. The Testing Coordinator and ENL Coordinator Ms. Yip ensures that all students receive a copy of the NYS Math Test and NYS Science Test in English and in their home language when available. In addition, glossaries and word to word dictionaries are provided to ENL students in their home language to ensure that all ENLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Our ENL teachers articulate on an ongoing basis with classroom teachers, sharing strategies and projected school work. The ENL teacher assists students in becoming proficient in four language skills: listening, speaking, reading and writing. The overall goal of ELL instruction is the acquisition of linguistic and communicative competence. We differentiate instruction for our ELL subgroups. Students continue to receive all testing modifications. They receive extended time during testing. During NYS ELA exams, they receive a third reading of the listening selection. a. For SIFE, we offer after-school and extended day programs for SIFE. We offer a Title III Afterschool Program and a Title III summer program that caters to their needs. ENLs are grouped homogeneously and are given ELA instruction along with test preparation. Students who are SIFE, are encouraged to attend these valuable sessions on the weekend or in our after-school program. These programs provide small group instruction to ELLS on improving reading comprehension skills and writing skills. b. These are identified under CR Part 154 as having English as a new language instruction, as a component of their freestanding English as a new language program, for a total fo zero to three continuously enrolled school years in the United States. We utilize the Milestones program for ELA instruction and Access History, Science and Math for the other content areas. These textbooks are meant to supplement the instruction in the content areas and allows for differentiation of instruction. c. Developing ENLs are identified under CR Part 154 as having received English as a new language instruction, as a component, of their freestanding ENL program , for a total of four to six continuously enrolled school years in the United States. d. ENLs receiving services 4 to 6 years are offered a more rigorous supplemental Saturday and summer program that targets their weaknesses. For long term ENLs (completed six years), the instruction is more intensive, but tailored to their needs. They are also reviewed by our PPT Committee to determine if additional services are warranted. Our supplemental programs for ENL students included three periods of RTI instruction a week. Teachers provide supplementary instruction during enrichment periods to reinforce those skills learned in the Language Arts classes. All students are encouraged to attend our Extended Day program which meets two days a week for fifty minutes and provides homework help and individualized instruction to help ENLs develop academic language in content areas. It is mandatory that 7  all long term Ells attend this program. We incorporate our special needs children into our ENL program, based on NYSESLAT level and not always by grade level. We utilize our special needs instructional staff for supplemental services to our special needs population, (ICT, SETSS, and self contained). Our guidance department is very supportive and sensitive to the needs of our ELL students. They are actively involved in providing services for those students who are struggling socially or emotionally. In addition, teachers and administrators work collaboratively to assist our students both academically and socially to help ease the transition into American society. Our ENL students make up an important part of our after-school NIA program, where they receive academic and emotional support services, as well as, important socialization skills in an inclusive setting. This year the NIA is continuing with a program which targets 30 ENLs who participate in a literacy/homework help after-school program which meets from October to June for approximately three hours on Mondays-Thursdays. The program also includes life skills, counseling and recreation. On Saturdays and before/after school hours, ENL students are also encouraged to participate in our CHAMPS program in basketball, flag football, and soccer. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ENL-SWDs are using Access, Milestones, and Code X with their students. For progress monitoring we will be implementing IReady to focus on monitoring these subgroups progress. This web-based literacy program addresses content, reading skills, fluency, word recognition, and comprehension for individual students. IReady differentiates based on the students’ reading levels, while moving them to more rigorous, grade-level appropriate instruction through the year. The programs both incorporate audio components with visual stimuli to reinforce language and content acquisition. These classes have been programmed into our school’s computer labs to facilitate the use of these programs. Through this use of flexible scheduling, we ensure that these programs are meaningful and continuous for all students. Next year we will also be using another online program called Mindplay which is a virtual reading program that guides students through lessons and activities that are based on sound learning principles and motivate students to succeed. It also delivers vocabulary instruction to enhance and challenge students to learn new words and expand their knowledge of existing words. The program focuses on the five key elements of literacy instruction: phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary and comprehension. As part of our normal school culture to support least restrictive environments, we will identify ENL SWDs whom we can mainstream into other classes for their ENL services. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ENL SWD receive ENL services using either a push-in or pull- out model. Our web-based iReady literacy programs address content, reading skills, fluency, word recognition, and comprehension. It differentiates based on the students’ reading levels, while Destination Reading exposes them to more rigorous, grade-level appropriate instruction. The programs both incorporate audio components with visual stimuli to reinforce language and content acquisition. Through this use of flexible scheduling, we ensure that these programs will help our ENL-SWD achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency. As part of our normal school culture to support least restrictive environments, we will identify ENL SWDs whom we can mainstream into other classes for their ENL services. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At Joseph B. Cavallaro I.S. 281 we provide targeted intervention in students’ academic language/vocabulary development program and regular content area classes as well as the Common Core Learning Standards. Content teachers build English language development into their instruction. Teachers modify complexity in content so that students understand and can 8  participate in classroom activities. Teachers do not rely solely on themselves as the sources of knowledge and learning, but encourage interaction among students and involve more proficient and less proficient students and involve paraprofessionals when applicable. The teachers encourage authentic and meaningful communication and interaction about course content amongst students, and between themselves and students. Information is presented in varied ways. Teachers place the information in a context that is more comprehensible to the students using multiple media. All teachers of ENL students use visual stimuli, flexible groupings and a hands-on approach to make the content comprehensible for our ENL students. Teachers incorporate visual reviews with lists and charts, paraphrase points where appropriate , and encourage students to provide oral summaries. In Social Studies and Science, the teachers utilize the Access ENL books, which are modified to allow ENLs to access content on an appropriate level. In Math, manipulatives and hands-on activities are used. Additionally, we have purchased content-specific bilingual glossaries that students will use in their Math class. We offer an extended day program and after- school programs for all our ENL students. This year, we are continuing to implement a research-based learning program called Milestones .as well as a new literature anthology from Pearson. Milestones ensures that students are mastering skills and standards before being introduced to new ones. This research-based approach provides language-acquisition and content knowledge crucial for academic success. For our entering and emerging ENLs we utilize Margarita Calderon's Rigor Program in conjunction with Milestones. ELA classes stress vocabulary development and fluency. Teachers use various strategies to develop the students’ critical thinking and comprehension skills using fiction and non-fiction reading selections. They practice writing in different genres, such as personal narrative, fictional narrative, argumentative writing, and poetry. Students continue to receive all testing modifications. They receive extended time during testing. After school programs are offered to our transitional students to support and reinforce their reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year, we will be using iReady to track individual student progress more frequently throughout the school year. we will continue to incorporate technology in our ENL classrooms. SMART boards and IPads are used to meet students' needs and to make curriculum accessible to our ENL students. This gives the students visual context clues and aids, while reinforcing their listening skills. We will also incorporate the MindPlay Virtual Reading Coach program along with ReThinked which will focus on their social emotional learning as well. These two programs will also track individual student progress. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? n/a 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ENL students are offered equal access to all school programs. ENL students are identified in ATS and placed in appropriate morning program classes. They are also receiving RTI as a supplemental support, targeting students with low growth percentiles in ELA and math. The parent coordinator actively reaches out to parents of ENL students to participate in our after-school programs.They are invited to take part in after school programs that support them in social, emotional, and intellectual development. These programs are funded through IS281 Title I and III funding. Additionally, we offer an ENL after-school program that all ENL students are invited to participate in which is funded by DYCD. I.S. 281 also hosts yearly cultural events during Respect for All Week, which ENL students are always a part of to help the school celebrate our diverse cultures. The students in after-school academic programs are grouped by proficiency level and serviced by an ENL certified teacher. In addition to their mandated ENL hours, students are pulled by a reading specialist who focuses on first time test takers to provide support and instruction of skills necessary to succeed on the ELA/Math and NYESLAT Assessments. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All teachers of ENL students use visual stimuli, flexible groupings and a hands on approach to make the content comprehensible for our ENL students. In Social Studies and Science, the teachers utilize the Access ENL books, which are modified to allow ENLs to access content on an appropriate level. In Math, manipulatives and hands-on activities are used. Additionally, we have purchased content-specific bilingual glossaries that students will use in their Math class. We offer an 9  extended day program and after- school programs for all our ENL students. This year, we are continuing to implement a research-based learning program called Milestones as well as a new literature anthology from Scholastic in conjunction with our existing anthology from Pearson. Milestones ensures that students are mastering skills and standards before being introduced to new ones. This research-based approach provides language-acquisition and content knowledge crucial for academic success. The Pearson literature anthology includes online and print resources to help teachers differentiate instruction for their ENL students. We are continuing to implement Destination Reading, which we began during our Title I ENL summer program and are sustaining throughout this school year using the laptops we purchased from the grant funding as well as our computer labs and iPads. we believe in the continued integration of technology within our curriculum. We will continue to incorporate technology in our ENL classrooms. LCD projectors are used to display PowerPoint presentations. SMART boards and iPads are used to meet students' needs and to make curriculum accessible to our ENL students. This gives the students visual context clues and aids, while reinforcing their listening skills. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our ENL program all instruction is given in English. However, students' native languages are supported with bilingual dictionaries and content based native language glossaries. A selection of native language independent reading books are also available to promote native language literacy. In our DL Program students are also supported with resources in both languages-Mandarin and English. There are also bilingual dictionaries and glossaries available should students need them. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services, support and resources correspond to the ages and grade levels of our ELLs in that all materials utilized are high interest, but tailored to their reading level and include age appropriate content. Furthermore, all materials ELL students are exposed to in content area classes are aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards specified for each grade. Resources and services utilized in the ENL program are on grade level and modified by ENL teachers and content area teachers to meet the needs of each of our ENL subgroups. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All teachers of ENL students use visual stimuli, flexible groupings and a hands on approach to make the content comprehensible for our ENL students. In Social Studies and Science, the teachers utilize the Access ENL books, which are modified to allow ENLs to access content on an appropriate level. In Math, manipulatives and hands-on activities are used. Additionally, we have purchased content-specific bilingual glossaries that students will use in their Math class. We offer an extended day program and after- school programs for all our ENL students. This year, we are continuing to implement a research-based learning program called Milestones as well as a new literature anthology from Scholastic in conjunction with our existing anthology from Pearson. Milestones ensures that students are mastering skills and standards before being introduced to new ones. This research-based approach provides language-acquisition and content knowledge crucial for academic success. The Pearson literature anthology includes online and print resources to help teachers differentiate instruction for their ENL students. We are continuing to implement Destination Reading, which we began during our Title III ENL summer program and are sustaining throughout this school year using the laptops we purchased from the grant funding as well as our computer labs and iPads. we believe in the continued integration of technology within our curriculum. We will continue to incorporate technology in our ENL classrooms. LCD projectors are used to display PowerPoint presentations. SMART boards and iPads are used to meet students' needs and to make curriculum accessible to our ENL students. This gives the students visual context clues and aids, while reinforcing their listening skills. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the start of the school year, we host a parent orientation. All parents, including those of ENL students are invited and encouraged to participate. We also complete an inventory of materials to ensure that they are available. Our ENL teachers also meet prior to the beginning of the school year to identify potential ENLs. When newly enrolled ENL students arrive at Cavallaro, they are greeted by the Parent Coordinator , Christine DeMatteo and the ENL Coordinator, Ms. Yip who provide emotional and academic support to the students. If Ms. Yip is not available, then one of the other ENL teachers will greet them in the main office. 0  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? In our DL Program, we offer Mandarin as a language elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Our DL Mandarin Program began in September 2015. The Dual Language model is described as a 50-50 two way program where 50 percent of the students will be ENLs and 50 percent will be English proficient. Students received ENL in their self contained setting provided by the bilingually certified Chinese teacher. Students received instruction in English in ELA and Science content areas. They also received instruction in Mandarin in Math and Social Studies content areas. Last year, we did have a Dual Language Spanish program as well. However, our two teachers, at the end of the year abruptly left for transportation reasons. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development is ongoing throughout the year at I.S.281 for all ENL and content area teachers of our ENL population. This includes guidance counselors, paraprofessionals, secretaries, parent coordinator, administrators, coaches, psychologists and speech therapists. The hours surpass the minimum of 7.5 hours. They are currently receiving high quality staff and curriculum development through internal and external providers. Brooklyn South and the Office of ELLs provides monthly professional development, and selected staff members turn-key to build capacity. We are focusing on the CCLS, instructional shifts, UDL, differentiated instruction and collaborative data inquiry and teacher team practice in our study groups.Webb’s Depth of Knowledge and the Cognitive Rigor Matrix are utilized to ensure strategic and extended thinking activities. All members of the school community will be attending meetings and workshops offered for ENLs through our CFN 533. Teachers will also be encouraged to attend professional development available from the Office of ENLs. Study groups and book talks are offered at I.S.281. Professional development on using ENL and differentiating instruction resources are offered periodically, and all ENL personnel are committed and contribute to these PDs regularly. The resources utilized are: Differentiating Instruction by Carol Tomlinson, Learning to Learn in a Second Language, Scaffolding Language, and Scaffolding Learning by Pauline Gibbons as well as Teaching Second Language Learners in the Mainstream Classroom, and Bringing Words to Life by Dr. Isabel Beck. Teachers are also set up to intervisit classes across grades to build capacity as an ongoing practice of identifying and implementing different ENL strategies with ENL students. All teachers of ENLs meet for one common planning period four times a week. For common planning periods, teachers share out ENL best practices, discuss individual student progress, and plan for interdisciplinary instruction. ENL teachers are currently receiving high quality staff and curriculum development through internal and external providers. The Brooklyn Field Support Office and the Office of ENLs provides monthly professional development, and selected staff members turn-key to build capacity. We are focusing on the CCLS, instructional shifts, UDL, differentiated instruction and collaborative data inquiry and teacher team practice in our study groups.Webb’s Depth of Knowledge and the Cognitive Rigor Matrix are utilized to ensure strategic and extended thinking activities. . Teachers will also be encouraged to attend professional development available from the Office of ENLs. Study groups and book talks are offered at I.S.281. Professional development on using ENL and differentiating instruction resources are offered periodically, and all ENL personnel are 1  committed and contribute to these PDs regularly. This year we were fortunate to take part in the Learning Partners Program which as a Partner School, we have been provided with structured interschool collaborative learning experiences with MS 137 (LPP host school) and MS. 226 (LPP Partner School). We have been able to share/adopt/adapt strong practices and utilize collaborative structures within and across these schools as a vehicle for school improvements, especially with ENL instruction. Since this is a three year program, we will be continuing with these interschool visitations during the 2018-19 school year. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school provides support for the staff to assist ENLs as they transition from one school level to another through open school night, Career Day, assemblies, and support from the guidance counselor. Presenters from area high schools come and explain the various programs that are available at their schools. The parent coordinator and guidance counselor support parents in completing the high school application. Career Day takes place each year and supports the importance of college and career readiness and the importance of a strong high school education. A professional development binder is maintained containing all of our ENL professional development logs that include teacher signatures and agendas. The ELL training of all staff exceeds the minimum of 7.5 hours for the school year. Also, the school has a record of all intervisitations amongst the staff so as to compile feedback that may be used for future professional development. Additionally, an outside professional development specialist, Clara Katz along with the Literacy Coach, helps to mentor new Our ENL Professional Development Calendar includes the following: • New DOE Capacity Framework • Scholastic Code X (Instructional Routines review) • NYC DOE Talent Coach (Norming and Calibration • Advance Training for Staff (Measures of Student Learning, Measures of Teacher Practice, Initial Planning Conferences) • ENL/ELA Curriculum Mapping • LPP Team • CEP • LAP Plan • School Wide Instructional Focus • Mathletics Training • iReady ELA & Math refresher pd • ENL Principles • Demonstration Teachers Introduction ThinkCerca Professional Development • Scholastic Code X – Planning for Unit 1 and Curriculum Map (ESL Strategies)Revision • UDL/RTI – Planning for Success • Quality Review • Literacy in the Content Areas • Math: Looking at Curriculum Maps/ Navigating Through DDC/ Exam View Test Generator • Strategies for Incorporating Texts in Social Studies • Scholastic Code X Unit Planning, Curriculum Map Revision, and Strategies for Success • Math: Lesson Sharing CCLS Lesson Plan Template/ Lesson Planning Using SchoolNet – Baseline Results • Scholastic Code X Unit Planning, Curriculum Map Revision, and Strategies for Success • ENL Modality Analysis • Mathletics/ Math IXL • Academic Language Development for ELLs in CCLS • BESIS Training • Academic Vocabulary Across Disciplines 2  • NYSITELL Training • Test Sophistication - Quarterlies Development • Scholastic Code X Unit Planning, Curriculum Map Revision, and Strategies for Success • Math: Lesson Planning SchoolNet – Benchmark Results/ Scoring with the Mathematics Holistic Rubrics • Breaking apart the NYSESLAT April: • Scholastic Code X (Network PD) • Teacher Effectiveness Ambassador • Scholastic Code X Unit Planning, Curriculum Map Revision, and Strategies for Success • Math: Preparation for the NYS Math Assessment • ENL Principles • Breaking Apart the NYESLAT May: • Scholastic Code X (Network PD) • LPP PD Workshops aligned to the Instructional Focus and Inquiry Cycles • Scholastic Code X Unit Planning, Curriculum Map Revision, and Strategies for Success • Math/ELA: Breaking Apart the NYS 2017 Math/ELA Assessment • Science: Breaking Apart the NYS 2017 Science Assessment and Living EnvironmentRegents • NYSESLAT Proctoring Review • Review/Revise ELA Curriculum Maps • Math: Revisiting/Revising Curriculum Maps Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are invited to attend workshops with the ENL teachers. Parent Orientation meetings are ongoing throughout the year to support our enrollment. To evaluate the needs of our ENL parents, an oral interview is conducted at the end of the meeting to ascertain topics for future parent meetings and to inform them of school expectations. Translators are available to facilitate this process. The ENL Toolkit is utilized to support any needs in our ENL department. The ENL Assistant Principal, ENL service providers, parent coordinator conduct presentations guiding parents through the process of assessing their child's progress, especially using Pupil Path, and teaching them about the programs utilized by our ENLS. Additionally, a new DOE website , NYC Schools will also allow parents to assess their child's progress as well. In addition, resources will be made available on our school website. Strategies and support are offered and provided in collaboration with administrations, teachers and the parent coordinator. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our ENL teachers articulate on an ongoing basis with classroom teachers and parents, sharing strategies and projected school work. Notices going home are translated in the different languages. Parental involvement for for parents of ENLs includes the following: Orientation Evening, Parent Teacher Conferences, Parent Outreach Committee, Holiday Social (CBO- NIA), fall and spring festivals of the arts, Specialized HS Night, May Parent Teacher Evening. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. We are happy to be continuing with our Adult Literacy Program which is in its third year. Once a week for two hours, adults from our school community attend our Adult Literacy Class which is facilitated by our Mandarin Dual Language Teachers, Ms. Palumbo and Ms. Tang. 3  4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Maria Bender, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Joseph B. Cavallaro School DBN: 21K281 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Maria Bender Title Principal Maria Delfini Assistant Principal Christine DiMatteo Parent Coordinator Helen Yip ENL/Bilingual Teacher Maureen Maxwell Parent Valerie Sarcuni Teacher/Subject Area Anna Dunlavey Teacher/Subject Area Fran Catania Fatema Mohassib Coach Coach Danielle Thompson School Counselor Isabel DiMola Ronny Rodriguez Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Ronny Rodriguez Jaclyn Kronfeld Other IEP Teacher Yu Palumbo Lilly Tang Other Dual Language Tchr Other Dual Language Teacher Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/28/18 09/28/18 09/28/18 09/28/18 09/28/18 09/28/18 09/27/17 09/28/18 09/28/18 09/28/18 09/28/18 09/28/18 09/28/18 09/28/18 9/28/18 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 21K281 School Name: Joseph B. Cavallaro Superintendent: Isabel DiMola The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Helen Yip ELL Coordinator, LAC YES Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Schools must determine within 30 (thirty) days of a student's enrollment (or, for students already enrolled , by a date and procedure to be determine by the Office of Teaching and Learning) the primary language spoken by the parent of each student enrolled in the school, and if such language is not English, whether the parent requires language assistance in order to communicate effectively with the DOE and school. After reviewing the LAP, ATS Reports (RLAT), and our Home Language Surveys our major findings indicate that 19.1% of our school population are English Language Learners and therefore are in need of written, as well as, oral interpretation. Translators are available when we determine whether the parent requires language assistance to communicate effectively. At I.S. 281, many of our translation services are provided by our staff. Parents often choose to rely on an adult friend/companion or relative for language and interpretation services. Much of our staff is bilingual in such languages as Spanish,Urdu, Arabic, Russian and Chinese. We have identified these languages as our most widely spoken languages. In addition, members of our staff also speak Italian and French. The school maintains an appropriate and current record of the primary language of each parent with such information maintained in ATS (report RAPO) and on the student emergency card. We have created a master list identifying all in house 7  translators in all languages of our diverse community. Emergency Blue Cards are also updated regularly to keep parent language choices current. This document is reviewed and updated periodically throughout the school year. We utilize the Department of Education's Translation and Interpretation Unit to assess important letters in multiple languages so that parents are aware of their choices. We feel that most of our in house translation and interpretation needs are being met by our staff and other members of our school community. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Based on each child's home language survey, we ascertain the dominant language of the parent. Through the Home Language Survey and ATS reports, the trend indicates that Limited English speaking parents consists of the following major languages: Chinese, Mandarin, Cantonese, Russian, Spanish, Urdu, Uzbek, and Arabic. There are less than five in each of the following languages: Georgian, Korean, Japanese, Tadzhik, and Italian. Teachers whose parents have elected to receive information in their home language have had this information communicated to them by the ENL Coordinator. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 8  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The school provides parents whose primary language is a covered language with a translation of any document that contains individual, student-specific information regarding, but not limited to a student's: health, safety, legal or disciplinary matters, and entitlement to public education or placement in any Special Education, ELL or non-standard academic program. Our school website also contains information about parent-teacher conference announcements, after-school program information, testing dates, general overviews of curriculum, letters from the school administration and is able to be translated in the various languages using Google translate. Any additional materials that require translation are sent out to the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit where they shall work with our school to make such translations available in a timely fashion. 2018-19 School Calendar Sept. 5 , 2018- First Day of School for Students Sept. 10-11,2018- Schools closed for Rosh Hashanah Sept. 18,2018- School closed for Yom Kippur Sept. 20, 2018- Parent Teacher Conferences 4:30-7:30 p.m. Oct. 8, 2018- Schools Closed for Columbus Day Oct. 26, 2016- Parent Teacher Conferences Evening Nov. 6, 2018- Schools Closed for Election Day Nov. 12, 2018- Schools Closed for Veteran's Day 9  Nov. 23 & 24, 2018- Schools Closed for Thanksgiving Recess Nov.27, 2018-P/T conferences 4:30-7:30 Dec. 24, 2018- Jan. 1, 2019- Schools Closed for Winter Recess Jan. 21, 2019- Schools Closed for Martin Luther King Jr. Day Feb. 5, 2019- Schools Closed for Lunar N.Year. Feb. 18-22, 2019- Schools closed for Mid-Winter Recess March 27, 2019- Parent Teacher Conferences 4:30-7:30 p.m. April 19-26, 2019- Schools Closed for Spring Recess May 16, 2019- Parent Teacher Conferences May 29, 2017- Schools Closed for Memorial Day June 4, 2019- Schools closed for Eid al-Fitr June 6, 2019- Schools Closed for Chancellor's Conference Day June 11, 2019- Schools Closed for Clerical Day June 26, 2019- Last Day For all students 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Formal face-to face meetings occur during our Orientation Evening, Parent/Teacher Conferences, End of the Year (May) Parent Meetings,PTA meetings, Fall and Winter Festival of the Arts Performances,IEP annual or triennial meetings, meetings with the attendance teacher, guidance counselors/SBST, or with administration and deans ( if disciplinary in nature). Teachers communicate with parents throughout the year via Skedula/PupilPath, Remind, in order to address questions/concerns 0  as well as any possible issues in or outside the classroom. Time is allotted during Parent Engagement Tuesdays in the afternoon for teachers to meet with parents. If necessary, the guidance counselor will also be present during such meetings. Administration arranges these meetings so that parents can meet with all of their children's teachers in one room. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We are aware that it is our responsibility to provide each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. Our Parent Coordinator will disseminate this to the parents when necessary. We post in a location near the primary entrance of the school, a sign in each of the covered languages indicating the availability of interpretation services. The school's safety plan will also contain procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school's administrative offices solely due to language barriers. If more than 10% of the students in our school speak a primary language that is neither English nor a covered language, we shall obtain from the Translation and Interpretation Unit a translation into such language for parents. The Parent Coordinator will direct parents to the Department's website which will provide them, depending on the covered language, with information concerning the rights of parents to translation and interpretation services and how to access such services. The school staff are aware of language assistance services provided by the school using data (ATS Reports, Blue Cards), updated rosters of bilingual staff and the Translation and Interpretation Unit Services, and daily interactions with parents with limited English proficiency. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 1  The school will maintain records of all language access services it provides to parents. Our Parent Coordinator will also contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit to acquire information about their records of all language access services it has provided to our school throughout the school year. The ENL teacher also meets individually with parents/guardians of ENLs and can then also ascertain the needs and concerns that they may have. After such meetings, the ENL teacher confers with the parent coordinator and/or the classroom teachers in order to discuss the needs of the parents/guardians and students. 2 
