 13K307 School Name: P.S. 307 DANIEL HALE WILLIAMS Principal: STEPHANIE CARROLL   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Daniel Hale Williams k Pre-k - 5 209 York St. Brooklyn, NY 11201 718-834-4748 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 13K307 718-855-4181 Fax: Stephanie Carroll scarroll2@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Stephanie Carroll Bernice Wise RashidaLawrence Shonique Greene Benjamin Greene N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 13 Superintendent’s Office Address: ZinaCooperWilliams Superintendent: 355 Park Place, Brooklyn, NY 11238 zcooper@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-636-3284 Phone Number: 718-636-3266 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston St. Brooklyn, NY 11201 bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Stephanie Carroll Bernice Wise RashidaLawrence AshleyMee MartinaMeijer SabinaDaniel *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/staff Member/staff Member/staff   Name FarajiHannah-Jones MichelleGilmoreGreenberg VeronicaRansom MiriamCyrus Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/parent Member/parent Member/ parent Member/ parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is: Section 4: CEP Overview Dr. Daniel Hale Williams P.S. 307 Magnet School for STEM Studies, in partnership with the community, is a school of excellence, serving diverse learners with a commitment to developing the whole child into becoming global citizens of exemplary character with unlimited potential.   Utilizing 21st century competencies of critical thinking, collaboration, communication and creativity, all students will grow as self-sufficient, life-long learners, leaving their mark on the world. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Erected in 1965, PS 307 is a pre-kindergarten – 5 th grade school located in the Vinegar Hill / DUMBO communities. The school sits in the Tech Triangle of downtown Brooklyn with ready access to the Brooklyn Navy Yard and other rich business and community resources. They include the Brooklyn Botanical Garden, the Brooklyn Museum and the Brooklyn Public Library at Grand Army Plaza. PS 307 is one train stop away from Manhattan. Social Emotional Learning (SEL) is one of the school's priority foci. An SEL curriculum is taught weekly in all classrooms and students begin training in grade 2 to become peer mediators. An SEL team meets regularly to plan, monitor and evaluate implementation and outcomes. We offer, on site, occupational and physical therapy, adaptive physical education, speech services, a school based health clinic, dental and mental health services to ensure that all students developmental needs can be met. Several important partnerships have been developed to support our academic program goals. They include Two Trees Management, Teachers College Reading and Writing Program, Exemplars Math, Teaching Matters, and Horizons at Brooklyn Friends. In October 2014, the school was awarded a Federal Magnet Grant for STEM studies. All students receive lessons in science, technology, engineering and mathematics. Partnerships with OmniLearn, Poly Tech and New York City Tech have led to the establishment of STEM residencies, the development of curriculum units of study and labs. There is a strong arts component with opportunities for music (Music and the Brain curriculum), choir, band, keyboard, visual art, dance (Brooklyn Ballet) and violin (Noel Pointer Foundation). The School’s strengths include a stable administration and ancillary staff, caring teachers and staff, enrichment opportunities, a school wide STEM theme, support services, a well organized and safe learning environment, professional learning opportunities, Smart boards and laptops in every classroom, and long held community, professional and corporate partnerships. Areas that need further development include the planning and effective delivery of rigorous instruction that is aligned with the CCLS and using formative assessment data to plan daily lessons that accelerate learning for every student in every classroom (Tenets 3 and 4). The school saw a significant increase in progress in the state ELA exam for the 2017-2018 year as a result of prioritizing reading engagement and the implementation of Teachers College Reading writing curriculum and best practices in teaching. Based on the School Environment Survey and long standing corporate and cultural partnerships we continue to meet expectations for providing students with a wholesome, multi-layered education experience (Tenets 5 and 6). 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 0  77% of our students are eligible for free or reduced lunch. 34% are Students With Disabilities and 3% receive ELL services. Our student population is comprised of 51% African American, 2% Asian, 30% Hispanic and 8% White. The school is organized into 25 classrooms. An Integrated Co-teaching class is established on each grade pre-k – 5. Our Autism Spectrum Disorder Program (ASD) is structured with one class on each grade comprised of 6-8 students in each classroom. These classes are taught by special education teachers with the support of paraprofessionals. There is a specialized curriculum, Rethink, that is used alongside the school’s standard curriculum to support the individual needs of the student. An autism specialist provides weekly instructional coaching to teachers in the program. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Over the past year, the school has made significant progress in English Language Arts as evidenced by an overall in increase in progress from 2016-2017 to 2017-2018. A focus on rigorous instruction, particularly in reading and writing, combined with continued nurturing of teacher collaboration and structures for a supportive environment, has leveraged student achievement. Math has also made significant progress over the last two school years. Going into the 2018-2019 school year, we will continue to focus on rigorous instruction, deepening the work already begun. We will also aim for greater consistency across the school with regards to all practices in every element of the framework. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 13K307 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 366 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 86 85 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 7 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 79.0% % Attendance Rate 75.1% % Reduced Lunch 2.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.6% 27.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 10.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 0% 19% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 31.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 61% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 42 42 90.2% 3.0% 35.8% 56.0% 3.0% 3.0% 2 19% 6.8 30.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2018 Quality Review, School leaders and faculty ensure that curricula are aligned to Common Core and the instructional shifts. Across grades and subjects, rigorous habits and higher-order skills are emphasized for all students, including English Language Learners(ELLs) and students with disabilities. Across classrooms, teaching practices are aligned to the curricula and reflect an articulated set of beliefs about how students learn best. This work led to an a 10.4% increase in ELA proficiency and a 7% increase in Math proficiency. One priority need that will be addressed is ensuring that the needs of the individual student is met. Teachers will be provided with continued support around formative assessments, analysis of student data and creating plans for individual students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all classroom teachers will authentically use standards-informed data and targeted progress monitoring in ELA and Math as evidenced by 100% of students moving a minimum of one grade level. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Activity 1: Professional Development All classroom teachers gr. K-5  Review instructional reports and ELA and Math curriculum to identify where and how standards are addressed.  Norming administration of running records.  Training on Miscue Analysis September 4, 2018 to October 12, 2018 Literacy Coach Assessment Matters Consultant Project Champion Administrators, Principal and Assistant Principal, Team Captains Activity 2: Data Gathering in ELA and Math  BOY Go Math Assessment   Writing on Demand(Personal Narrative) Fountas Pinnell Miscue Analysis K-5 Assessments due October All classroom teachers 12th Literacy Coach Assessment Matters Consultant Project Champion Administrators, Principal and Assistant Principal, Team Leads Math teachers Assessment Matters Consultant Project Champion Administrators, Principal and Activity 3: 1-5 October 2018-May 2019 Grade Teams will engage in inquiry cycles for both ELA and Math 4  Activity 4: Assessment Matters Professional Development in best practices in math instruction and deepening inquiry work to support individual and groups of students’ mastery of math standards Assistant Principal, Team Leads 1-5 September 2018-May 2019 Assessment Matters Consultant Project Champion Administrators Team Captains  September 10 consultant visits  October 3-day training for Team Captains  4 cohort intervisitations Activity 56: K-5 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers College Professional Development  Staff developers provide 20 days of PD through lab sites and meetings with grade teams  Continue with a full-time literacy coach who supports the coordination and implementation of TC units of study Literacy Coach provides one on one coaching and team teaching as well as planning support.   Coaching institute in the fall.  20 calendar days for teachers to attend professional development at TC. 2 TC staff developers (K-2, 3-5) Literacy Coach Administrators Teachers Activity 7: K-5 September 2018-June 2019 IEP Teacher Special Education Teachers and IEP Teacher to provide intervention to Special Education Students and At-risk Gen Ed students a year behind in reading. (schedule created) Administrators Autism Spectrum Disorder Coordinator Small group   Push-in  Individual 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 5  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be supported to deepen their understanding of the key standards in ELA and Math through exposure to standards that have been translated into student work products. BiMonthly workshops in ELA and Math addressing standards, ways to support children’s reading engagement and math number sense. Workshops will be interactive and will be facilitated by teachers, coaches, and administrators. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Two TC staff developers at 10 days each (K-2) and (3-5)  20 TC conference days for teachers and administrators  1 Assessment Matters Consultant to work 10 days with a focus on supporting teachers with math instruction and assessment  Per session to analyze data and plan accordingly Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitoring midpoint benchmark will be at the end of January 2018. We will look for the following evidence:  All grade 1 -5 students will have mastered each of the standards addressed in their respective pacing guide calendars by January 30, 2019. In order to progress monitor ELA standard 10 (Text Complexity), by January 31st students will increase their F& P independent reading levels as follows: Grade 1: 4 level increase minimum Grade 2: 4 level increase minimum Grade 3, 4, and 5: 2 level increase minimum ELA standard 11 (Response to Reading) will be monitored through reading notebooks and a standards aligned rubric for students in grades 3-5. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 6  Fountas and Pinnell diagnostic reading assessment, Mastery Connect Assessment Matters tool, math standards aligned common assessments and rubric aligned to ELA standard 11 - response to reading. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The school will continue to use the content, systems and structures in place to support students Social Emotional Learning including the Project Wisdom curriculum, Student Declaration, Class Dojo, monthly assembly programs, School Based Health Clinic/Dentist, CARE (Children are Reason Enough Team and SEL(Social Emotional Learning Team. As evidenced by the current level of referrals to the CARE Team, there is a small population of students who have yet to respond to the above supports and there is a need for additional targeted social emotional support for at risk students and students with disabilities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 , all school staff will have developed a deeper understanding of the supportive nature of the Citywide Behavioral Expectations/Discipline Code and utilize it as a tool to support and increase students’ pro-social behaviors as evidenced by a 50% decrease in OORS incidents. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Activity 1: PK-5 Train new staff and review with senior staff, the Project Wisdom curriculum. The Project Wisdom is a character education program that uses one-minute messages to inspire our students and encourage character building skills. Activity 2: 2-5 Students will be trained to become upstanders in the school community to support student behavior during lunch, recess, arrival and dismissal times. Activity 3: Professional Development on Data Collection, Crisis Intervention and Discipline Code Ladder of Support during Tuesdays’ Family Engagement Activity 4: Safety and OORS training for key staff. Activity 5: Continue CARE(Children Are Reason Enough) and SIT (Student Intervention Team) Team meetings Regular Scheduled meetings with classroom teachers to September 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Instructional Coach, Social Emotional Learning Team, CARE Team, All teachers. September 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Guidance Counselor, Behavioral Psychologist All teachers, Para-professionals and Families September 2018-June 2019 Behavioral Psychologist, Guidance Counselor, Administrators, CARE/SIT Team. Pre-K - 5 Pre-K - 5 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Administrative Assistant, Administrators Special Education Coordinator IEP Teacher Guidance Counselor Behavioral Psychologist 9 Administrators Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administrators Guidance Counselor Behavioral Psychologist Teachers Parent Coordinator Behavioral Psychologist September 2018-June 2019 review IEPs, goals, and Action Plans   Co-develop FBA’s, BIPs Antecedent Behavioral Consequence data collected to inform interventions Activity 6: K-5 Grades 2-5 will review the Citywide Behavioral Expectations with their teachers to engage in self-reflective practices and class-wide problem solving. Classroom rules and consequences will be aligned to expectations and discipline code. Activity 7: K-5 Continued monthly community meetings, led by students in coordination with the Behavioral Psychologist. Monthly themes focused on the school’s mission and making the right choices. Emphasis on anti-bulling and cyberbullying education. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will receive information regarding the Citywide Behavioral Expectations as well as information on what the school-wide supports are. Families are also invited to the monthly community meetings. A two-series workshop will be coordinated for families on bullying and cyberbullying. Families will participate in SEL practices at the school through interactive workshops. Workshops will be held by Guidance Counselor, Behavioral Psychologist, Parent Coordinator, and teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Full-time Behavioral Psychologist available to assist in developing student action plans, monitor, and communicate progress in collaboration between the CARE/SIT committee and classroom teachers. Project Wisdom used weekly in grades K-5 to foster healthy social emotional skills Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 0  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By January 2019, the number of OORS ifnractions will be less than 15.  By January 2019, the number of level 4 and 5 infractions combined will not exceed 3 incidents.  By January 2019, any level 4 and 5 infractions will have attached report of assistance logs, demonstrating positive behavioral intervention supports and evidence of progress towards meeting behavioral expectations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Referrals, ABC forms, OORs reports, teacher input Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Professional Learning Teams have been an integral part of the structure for professional learning at P.S. 307. Teachers have collaborated across grades and subjects and have engaged in data-driven inquiry to improve outcomes for individuals and groups of students. Teachers themselves have facilitated these meetings and have been encouraged to adopt a teacher-leader approach to development and school-wide improvements. Based on the 2018 Quality Review, observation of teacher teams and analysis of impact of the teams resulted in a well-developed rating. There is a need to focus more granularly on individual student needs and specific subgroups of students within team data inquiry so that all students access the curriculum to the degree in which they are appropriately challenged. This means that students who require additional scaffolding, receive those scaffolds from the onset, while students who have demonstrated mastery, are pushed to deepen and extend their thinking accordingly. There are no limits to the level in which students can demonstrate mastery, therefore the inquiry work must constantly be focused on continuously moving all learning. Also, there is a need for additional fostering of support for one another through feedback that is constructive and inclusive of sharing best practices across classrooms. Over time, this will result in greater trust between staff, improved teacher practice, and greater consistency across classrooms. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 all teachers participate in actively seeking feedback and providing support to and from colleagues, resulting in over 75% of staff receiving a highly effective in Danielson component 4e as well as demonstrating individual progress across Domain 3 (3b., 3c., 3d) of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Activity 1: Teachers define question/s specific to their practice in which they want feedback, perspectives, and reflective dialogue. Pre-K-5 Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Activity 2: Inter-visitation cycles begin Pre-K-5 Teachers September 2018-June 2019  Led by Literacy Coach/Model teacher teams will visit colleagues to help them address their questions about practice. Visit will be followed by review of student work/ student learning and reflective dialogue to address next steps. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers Literacy Coach Administrators IEP Teacher Literacy Coach Administrators Teachers IEP Teacher, Model Teacher How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. It is a goal that through this work, teachers will not only deepen their practice, but also identify student learning outcomes resulting from their practice that can be shared with families on a regular basis. The expectation is that conversations and engagement with parents will be more learning focused with more clarity and concreteness in demonstrating child’s progress over time. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Preps are scheduled to ensure maximum common prep time, allowing teachers to meet more frequently within grades. (minimum 1 per week) 3  Staff will work flexibly to ensure that coverage is provided in order for teachers to visit their peers. Adjustments to schedule will be made based on need and commitment to implementation of learned practices. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 30, 2019, 75% of teachers will achieve an effective rating in 4e of the Danielson Framework. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance data in domain 3 and component 4e. Teachers' professional learning logs and reflections Administrators' log of assistance Teacher surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Effective School Leadership Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. There is deliberate emphasis on building capacity among teachers and teacher leaders. There are many opportunities to participate in decision making around curriculum, school culture, and professional development. The instructional cabinet is made up of teachers and coaches and meets regularly to review instructional goals and progress towards meeting these goals. A hiring committee, also made up of teachers, coaches, and administrators work to ensure that we recruit highly qualified candidates who demonstrate a commitment to moving the school’s agenda. Teacher Leaders exist across grades and subjects and professional learning teams are led by teachers. Teachers are also encouraged to participate in CARE(Children are Reason Enough) and SIT (Student Intervention Team) meetings in order to provide valuable input as well as to collaborate on action plans to support individual and groups of students. Various teacher-initiated committees exist throughout the school, resulting in overall improvements to the culture, instructional program, and student academic and social emotional development. As high standards have been communicated and practices in distributive leadership have been established, continuing to monitor the work to the degree that there is pedagogical coherence among teachers and classrooms is critical. Likewise, a strategic system of monitoring the effective implementation of professional learning and feedback is the goal to further accelerate student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, high intensity feedback and individual teacher support will result in improved instructional coherence across classrooms, individual teacher’s progress in Danielson 3b. and higher levels of student achievement; validated by individual teachers’ student progress data in ELA and Math. 5 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Pre K - 5 September 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Pre-K- 5 September 2018 Principal Assistant Principal PreK-5 January 2018 Principal Assistant Principal PreK-5 September 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Activity 1: Conduct morning and afternoon walk throughs, at varying times with lens on pedagogical shifts as a result of professional learning. Evidence collected daily Activity 2: Initial Planning meetings to include the development of a clear goal in area 3b. of Danielson, along with an action plan for progress monitoring Activity 3: Mid-year meetings with teachers to review Advance teacher data and student data. Activity 4: 1. Weekly Principal/AP walkthroughs 2. Meet with Assistant Principal weekly to review lesson plans for: objectives and activities that are coherent with the stated common core standards, Planning of purposeful questions in lessons that lead to rich student discussions. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administrators will ensure that teachers are providing resources to families to enhance questioning and student/parent discourse. Prior to units of study, teachers will share an overview of unit, expected outcomes and an example of level 3 and 4 student work. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 6  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Ongoing support from District Teacher Development and Evaluation Coach Coaching and Teacher development Professional Learning resources to support teachers Providing additional preps in schedule to work with individual teachers and or push in to the classroom Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 55% percent of Advance observations will be completed. Advance ratings will show a 15 % increase in area 3b from October 2018 to January 2019 Greater consistency between Principal and Assistant Principal observation and feedback Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance observation tracking tool Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school continues to develop effective structures to communicate students’ progress with families on a regular basis as students take more responsibility for relaying their learning progress to parents and guardians. There is a need for families to be empowered and supported with engaging with their children in their learning and social emotional development. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, family participation at academic focused school events will increase as evidenced by a 25% increase in attendance at events and favorable survey feedback. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers utilize a percentage Parent Engagement time designated on Tuesdays to plan in grade level teams for student-led conferences. K-5 September 2018-June 2019 Students will lead at parent- teacher conferences. K-5 September 2018-June 2019 Bi-Monthly interactive workshops on topics related to curriculum, Next-Generation standards, and learning development will be hosted for families and by families. families September 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Teachers Teacher Leaders Principal Assistant Principal Teachers Students Families Principal Assistant Principal Instructional Coach Teacher Leaders Teachers Families, ASD Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Public Good, CUNY, Cookshop 9  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session for planning and preparation for workshops. Monies will be allocated for instructional materials to use in the family workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. From November 2018 to January 2019, we will see an increase in parent participation at family workshops and parent/student classroom activities, as evidenced by sign in sheets and feedback forms. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Family surveys, sign in sheets and feedback forms Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Summative and formative assessments Summative and formative assessments Summative and formative assessments Summative and formative assessments At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Referral to CARE/SIT team and Individualized Education Plan Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) 1:1, small groups Day and after school 1:1, small groups Day and after school 1:1, small groups 1:1, small groups 1:1, small groups Day Day Day Online software, independent reading, shared reading Online software, problem solving using a rubric, computation exercises Formative assessments Formative assessments SBST Psychologist, Behavioral Psychologist Guidance counselor 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 7 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The school will support families to ensure that students are consistently in school and on time. Students will receive school supplies periodically and will be provided with information on additional services available in the school and in the community. Ie. Lutheran medical, social worker, etc. The Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselor will periodically meet with students and their families to further assess individual family needs and to provide ongoing academic and social emotional resources. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Referrals from colleges, Department of Education human resources recommendations and recruitment fairs are used primarily to identify HQ teacher candidates. New teachers are partnered with a mentor and buddy teachers and meet once a month (New Teacher Academy) 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). To ensure high quality professional development new and existing teachers are provided with ongoing job-embedded professional development in literacy and math. In Literacy, Teacher’s College(TC) Staff Developers conduct Lab-sites and meetings for grades K-5 in monthly cycles. Select teachers participate in Teacher’s College Calendar Days and Study Groups. They turn key strategies learned with the staff during the Other Professional Learning on the first Tuesday of every month. The principal attends TC’s principal conference 3-4 times a year. The school-based Literacy Coach and Universal Literacy Coach follow-up with the work of the TC Staff Developers in addition to providing support in planning, delivery of instruction through demonstration lessons, coaching, co-teaching and debriefing, as well as, one-to-one conferences. For Paraprofessionals and Educational Assistants, professional learning sessions are conducted to provide strategies to support their practice and to ensure student achievement. In Math, a math consultant will support teachers during 10 days throughout the school year. The consultant will provide support around analysis of student data and addressing the needs of the indvidiual student. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 4  n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). At PS 307, we are committed to creating a smooth transition for those students coming to our school from early childhood programs. Whether it be students coming from a day care center to our Pre-K classes or a student entering kindergarten from an early childhood program we offer the following supports:  PS 307 offers Open House Tours for Pre-K & K before and during the application period.  PS 307 offers an Open House Tour specifically for the directors of the neighboring early childhood programs.  This allows the directors to share with their families information about PS 307. Local early childhood centers are welcome to bring their students for a visit to familiarize themselves with an elementary school setting.  Upon receiving an offer letter to our Pre-K or K classes from the NYCDOE, families are invited to attend an additional Open House Tour before the registration period begins.  PS307 offers Open House Tours during the school day, in the evenings and on selected Saturdays.  In late June, PS 307 hosts a “Meet and Greet” event in which new families can meet our staff as well as members of our PTA. In late August, families who are accepting their seats will attend an orientation session.  As students enter our school, teachers will interview families via a questionnaire to obtain information about the child, their family and any recommended services required for that child. Teachers will also obtain additional information as needed from the child’s previous school. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) Committee was formed to support in the selection of the periodic and baseline assessments. Once the assessments were administered professional development in Norming of the Rubric and Scoring was conducted. Another session to discuss the trends will be conducted to identify areas in need of improvement. In addition, teachers will be trained to read and analyze the Performance Assessment Data on Schoolnet. They will use the item analysis to plan for small group strategy lessons and conferences. 5  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 284,826.00 114,577.00 0 0 2,160, 889.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 6  semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Template Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 13K307, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 13K307 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 8  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 9  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) 13K307, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 0  ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 1  ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2  ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 13 School Name Daniel Hale Williams Borough Brooklyn School Number 307 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Stephanie Carroll Coach Crystal Brinn ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Mulan Mo Teacher/Subject Area N/A Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent N/A Assistant Principal Maria Guzman Coach N/A School Counselor Alexis Edwards Parent Xiu Zhu Chen Parent Coordinator Willie Crosland Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 331 4 Total number of ELLs 10 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.02%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? . Fountas and Pinnell - Identify reading levels and reading progress . Writing on Demand - Identify writing levels and writing progress . Online KidsAtoZ Assessment - Identify their progress in reading levels - Word Identification - Spelling Inventory 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The assessments are administered a minimum of 4 times a year. . Results are shared among classroom teachers and the ENL teacher. . Results are shared with students and are used to set up reading and writing goals for students. . Results are used to plan for small group instruction targeting students' individual needs. 5  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? . NYC Performance Assessment (MOSL) - Identify baseline, progress and areas of need . NYSITELL - Identify new ELLs and their Proficiency Levels . NYESLAT - Identify their Proficiency Levels and the areas of strength and weakness . EDAT ELL Data Analysis Tool - Identify at risk levels 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? . Students who are not meeting the baseline receive immediate Academic Interventon Services in addition to ENL service. . The names of students who need AIS are shared with school's AIS teacher. . Assessments data are shared with AIS teacher. . Request to have AIS service is made. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school uses the asessment data to guide instruction for ELLs. Based on the data, we have 1 entering, 2 emerging, 1 transitioning, 3 expanding, and 5 commanding students. First the ENL teacher provide Tier 1 instruction focused on promoting language and literacy development, targeting the student's needs on a daily basis. The ENL teacher provides oral language, written language, word reading, spelling, and reading comprehension instruction. Second the classroom teacher provides high-quality research-based instruction that is differentiated for ELLs and shares their knowledge of student performance in the context of the regular classroom, as well as their expertise in the classroom and grade-level skills with the ENL teacher so the ENL teacher can target on the skills the ENL student needs in her instruction. Third the reading intervention teacher can provide Tier 2 and Tier 3 interventions to our ELLs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. . NYSESLAT . ELA . Math . EDAT ELL Data Analysis Tool 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? . share with each ELL student's classroom teacher . share with AIS teacher who service our ELLs . share with Literacy Coach to receive additional support Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 6  The ENL program is to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. It is delivered by our certified ENL teacher, Ms. Mo. We have both a intergrated ENL model and a standalone model. In the intergrated ENL model, Ms. Mo works with ELLs in collaboration with general education classroom teachers to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. Ms. Mo and the classroom teachers plan their lessons through ongoing conversations and through e-mails. In the standalone model, students from two continous grades with mixed proficiency levels are group together for English-acquisition-focused instruction. Ms. Mo plans carefully with general education teachers to ensure curricular alighment and continuity of instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? For Entering proficiency level and Emerging proficiency level, students will receive a total of 360 minutes of ENL with 180 standalone ENL and 180 minutes of intergrated ENL/ELA. For Transitional proficiency level, students will receive 90 minutes of standalone ENL and 90 minutes of intergrated ENL/ELA. For Expanding profiency level, students will receive 180 minutes of intergrated ENL/ELA. For commanding proficiency level, students will receive 90 minutes of intergrated ENL in ELA or Content area. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered in the intergrated ENL/ELA program model. It is delivered by coteaching from a certified ENL teacher and a certified content area ELA teacher. Materials are classroom used text materials. ENL strategies sheltered English are used. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Not Applicable to our school. Currently we don't have Dual Language or Bilingual Program based on parent choice. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Currently we have no SIFE students. If we do get SIFE students, we use the following strategies: activate students prior knowledge, provide a print rich environment, engaging students in hands-on learning, use the SIOP model to teach language and content, provide intensive literacy/language instruction, and provide multiple opportunities to demonstrate understanding. For newcomer ELLs who have been in the program for less than three years , we differentiate instructions through giving the students a lot of visual aids, vocabulary supports, and language frames to help them express their ideas and thoughts in reading, writing, and speaking. For Developing ELLs who have been in the program for a total of four to six years, we differentiate instruction through using thinking maps, NUA strategies, graphic organizers to help them organize their thoughts to become a better reader and writer. Currently we have no Long Term ELLs. For former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status, we will continue support them through working closely with their classroom teachers. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 7  Some of the instructional strategies include1) Natinonal Urban Aliance(NUA) strategies for ELLs2) Graphic organizers 3) Thinking maps4) Audio-visual instructional aides5) Language frames6) Sheltered English approaches7) Smartboard 8) Technological instructional aides - Flocabulary, BrainPop, KidsAtoZ9) FUNDATIONS Phonics strategies for lower grades Materials used are grade-level classroom materials. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELLs with special needs are served according to goals set forth in the IEP. The ENL Teacher articulates with the IEP teacher/SETTS, Speech, Occupational Therapist, ASD coordinator and Special Education teachers, as well as other classroom teachers to set and adjust the instructional program. Data from the students’ performance on the NYSESLAT and other assessments are used to determine skills that need strengthening. All ELL-SWDs are programmed for the mandated number of units of ENL as per CR Part 154. Additional AIS intervention service is also provided to students who are at lower level of proficiency or who have not made anticipated progress after a reasonable time perod. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. These are the intervention services for ELLs in ELA, Math, and other core content areas. 1. Tier 1, strong core instruction is delivered to all students in the general education classroom by qualified teachers. These principles are followed: Teachers and students producing together. Developing language and literacy across the curriculum. Making lessons meaningful. Teaching complex thinking. Teaching through conversation. 2. Tier 2 "Double Dose" of Instruction is delivered by ENL teacher. Extra attention and activities are targeted to specific students, in addition to core instruction. 3. Tier 3, Intensive, targeted intervention is provided to support ELLs who are not showing sufficient progress on the skills and/or competencies measured. This intervention can be delivered by ENL teacher or intervention teacher according to schedule and work load of the teachers. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Intergrated ENL, coteaching with classroom teacher/core content teacher to meet the needs of ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? none 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are provided equal access to all school programs. Our school is a Magnet STEM school. All ELLs participate in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math . We also have Music, Physical Education, Visual Art, Mandarin Foreign Language, after-school choir, band, Brooklyn Friends School at Horizon and YMCA afterschool programs. All ELLs are part of these programs. They fully participate all programs offered in the school. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. To support our ELLs, we have online subscription of Reading A-Z, RAZ Kids individual account for all ELLs from K-5, Brainpop Junior for Grade K-2, Brainpop for Grade 3-5, Flocabulary for Grades K-5 students to support their learning. All ELLs have individual account for these online learning and the ENL teacher monitors their learning progress through online. Other instructional materials include: Teachers College Reading and Writing curriculum, Fundations, Words Their Way, Fountas and Pinnell, Go Math!, and STEM resouces. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We have an ENL program. Dictionaries for all languages are available for students to use. We also have a wide variety of Spanish books and Chinese books to provide home language support for our Spanish and Chinese speaking children. Content area Spanish and Chinese books are also available to support students learning. In addition, Reading A-Z online provides both 8  English and Spanish books to students. We also pair newcomer students with English proficient Spanish speakers for support. We do not have DL and TBE at our school. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Ms. Mo, the ENL teacher, organizes her groups by age and grade level, for example, she puts all her Kindergarten students together as one group, all her first grade together as another group, etc. Materials and resources used correspond to their age and grade level. She does intergrated ENL and services the students by class so that they are getting the same grade level texts as their peers. All required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A. There is no collocation at your school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). These are the activities to assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. We have a parent orientation. Parents and students have a tour of the school. Translators are available at the school. Ms. Carroll, our principal, speaks French. Ms. Guzman, our assistant principal, speaks Spanish. Ms. Mo, the ENL teacher, speaks Mandarin. Throughout the school year, we also have ongoing parent orientations. Phone numbers are exchanged with parents so that they can call Ms. Mo for anything regarding their newly enrolled ELLs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We have a Mandrin Foreign Language program. ELLs are welcome to participate. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development for our ELL personnel and common branches teachers is presented by trained and qualified individuals who may be members of our staff or someone from the FSC. The topics for professional development are derived from teacher/student needs, assessments, and data in different content areas. Our Assistant Principal provides ELL training for our staff during our Monday Professional Development from 2:20-3:40. ELL personnel also receives other content areas Professional Development provided by our school. All staff members have access to professional development in meeting the needs of ELLs. Our ENL teacher participates the professional development offered by the Office of English Language Learners and Brooklyn North Field Support Center. She aslo participates the professional development provided at the school level regarding the Common Core Learning Standards. The Professional Development helps support the ENL teacher in delivering common core-alligned instruction in ELA, Math, and other content areas. 9  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our ENL teacher will provide professional development for the 15% of total hours for all teachers. She will offer professional development during Mondays Professional Development time. Topics include Best Practices for English Language Learners and Formulate Small Group Instruction using assessments. She will keep records of these professional development with agendas and attendance and are placed in a folder. Our ENL teacher will get her 50% of total hours professional development by attending the professional development offered by Brooklyn North Field Support Center and the Office of English Language Learners. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our school uses the Parent Engagement time on Tuesdays 2:20pm to 3:35pm to meet with parents of ELLs individually to discuss goals of the program, language development, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Interpretation and translation is available through our own staff. Ms. Mo speaks Mandarin and Cantonese. Ms. Guzman speaks Spanish. Currently we only have Chinese and Spanish speaking ELLs. We will use the translation unit for other languages. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our parent coordinator includes our ELL parents in all activities. Parents of ELL students are integral members of the school community. The activities they are involved in the school include: School Leadership Team P.T.A membership meetings and related activities Volunteering Participating in parent orientations and workshops (cookshops, computer workshops) Supporting school based initiatives (classroom read alouds, Class Parent/Guardian, Career Day, school website, assembly programs, etc) Community events Community outreach School tours Parent Advisory Council Translation services are available during these Parent activities. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Stephanie Carroll, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Daniel Hale Williams School DBN: 13K307 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Stephanie Carroll Title Principal Maria Guzman Assistant Principal Willie Crosland Parent Coordinator Mulan Mo ENL/Bilingual Teacher Xiu Zhu Chen Parent N/A N/A Crystal Brinn N/A Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Alexis Edwards School Counselor N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 N/A N/A 10/20/17 N/A 10/20/17 N/A 2  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 13k307 School Name: Daniel Hale Williams Superintendent: Barbara Freeman The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Mulan Mo ENL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The ENL teacher uses the parents’ responses on Part III of Home Language Identification Survey to gather parents’ language preferences. She also uses the language information from the Student Emergency Contact Cards that parents filled out in September every year in case there are any changes. In addition she asks the pupil personnel secretary to generate ATS reports of Preferred Languages RCPL/RAPL to collect more data. She keeps records of all parents whose preferred language of communication is other than English. She then creates a school report by grade and glass whose parent's preferred language is other than English. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 3  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Chinese Cantonese 364 20 7 0 93.09% 5.12% 1.79% 0 360 22 6 3 92.07% 5.63% 1.53% 0.77 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Newsletters, Monthly calendars First day of the Month Curriculum Information 09/20 Parent Handbooks 09/20 Report Cards 11/01, 03/01, 6/28 Parent-Teacher Conference Letter 11/01, 03/01 New York State Testing Dates and Parent Letters 03/15, o4/15 IEP documents Any date Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. School Staff Translate through Per Session Translation budget or Tuesday Parent Engagement time School Staff Translate through Per Session Translation budget or Tuesday Parent Engagement time Have T&I Unit Translate Translation Request Form filled out 2 weeks in advance Use existing template from T&I Unit Intranet School Staff Translate through Per Session Translation budget or Tuesday Parent Engagement time School Staff Translate through Per Session Translation budget or Tuesday Parent Engagement time Use existing template from T&I Unit Intranet 4  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent-Teacher Conferences 11/03, 03/09 Over the Phone Interpretation IEP meetings Any date Curriculum Night Classroom teacher, attendance teacher, guidance counselor, parent coordinator calls to parents 09/15, 05/17 Any date or School Staff Interpret Over the Phone Interpretation or School Staff Interpret School Staff Interpret Over the Phone Interpretation or School Staff Interpret 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, we use phone, e-mail, school staff, and language line to reach limited-English-proficiency families. Ms. Mo will use the phone App WeChat to send out messages to Chinese families. She is connected with all Chinese parents through WeChat. She will also call the parents individually to inform them if the parents do not respond that they get their message. For our Spanish speaking parents, we have our AP who can call the families to inform them the emergency. We also have a few other staff who speak Spanish that can help as well. For other languages if we have, we will use language line to reach the families. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Language Translation and Interpretation Plan will be shared with all school staff on Monday Professional Development time. Translation request form for T&I, Over-the-Phone Free Interpretation Phone Number, and templates from T&I Unit Intranet will be shared with staff. Staff will fill out a Language Survey so we can identify who can serve as a translator or interpreter at our school. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 5  The LAC will display a multilingual welcome poster in the school’s main entrance. Language Identification Guide will be distributed to ELL parents. Ms. Mims, our security officer will have Language ID Guide at her desk to provide parents of ELLs for assistance. We will also have additional Language ID Guide on Main office counter and at secretary's desk. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We use parent surveys to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. Parent surveys are conducted twice a year, once in September, once in February. We have a focus group of parents inclusive of all cultures and languages represented in our school to gather feedback and best practices. 6 
