 School Name: 20K310 P.S. 310 Principal: YUQING HONG   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The School for Future Leaders 20K310 332000010310 K-5 School Number (DBN): 942 62 nd Street Brooklyn NY 11219 718-491-7670 718-491-7675 Phone Number: Fax: Valerie Rogers vrogers@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Yuqing Hong William Tak Wu Tiffany Lu Mariana Lara-Lennon WinnieNi n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 20 Karina Costantino Superintendent: 415 89 th Street, Brooklyn NY 11209 Superintendent’s Office Address: kcostan@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-759-4912 Phone Number: 718-759-4842 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Mauriciere de Govia FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89 th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-7862 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Yuqing Hong William Tak Wu WinnieNi Mariana Lara-Lennon KelliO'Shea Danqing(Annie) Chen *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/AP Member/Teacher Member/secretary   WinnieNi Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/parent Member/parent Member/parent Member/parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview   P.S. 310 is committed to creating a community of life-long learners equipped with 21st century knowledge and skills necessary to succeed as effective citizens, workers and leaders in the future global workforce. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Public School 310, The School for Future Leaders, situated in the Sunset Park section of Brooklyn, was established in September, 2010 in answer to the latest wave of immigration to New York City. The school fills an attractive five-story modern building on the corner of a busy commercial avenue, serving a diverse group of learners that are composed of 8.8% Hispanic, 83.1% Asian, 5.1% white, 1.9% Hawaiian/Pacific Islander. Among them, 48% are English as New Language Learners (ENLs), 10% are students with disabilities, and 90% are eligible for free lunch. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. In a school where 40% of the students are New Language Learners, our challenges remain to be the need of developing students' academic language and vocabulary repertoire, as well as their speaking skill as per the indications from the ELA Satewide Test and NYSESLAT result. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Over the past year, the school made the most progress in the element of Collaborative Teachers. The PS 310 instructional team is committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. Teachers had many opportunities to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. A year-long workshop series is planned and revised as needed to provide teachers with rigorous professional development opportunities during the designated Extended Day PD session on Mondays. These workshops included the New Teacher Support Institute, Study Groups, Data Analysis and data driven instruction, Inquiry Teams and school focused PD on Advanced Literacy and other relevant pedagogy skills and strategies. Teachers also attend workshops provided by the Field Support Center (FSC), sponsored by the Superintendent or offered by the national conferences to further their learning in Special Education, quality instruction in mathematics and foreign languages, and on how to move our agenda of aligning our work to the CCLS. With the vast learning opportunities, teachers shared their practices, collaborated through various teacher teams, and together designed and delivered rigorous instruction that improve student performance. To achieve this goal, P.S. 310 employs a rigorous set of curricula across content areas that are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and differentiated and well-planned professional development plans support teachers of all levels in shifting their instructional practice. In addition to the year round collaboration with Salvadori, BRIC, TarTar and other educational institutes that offer enrichment opportunities in various interdisciplinary STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Math) projects, this innovative elementary school features native and foreign language learning not as an add-on, but as an essential feature of the curriculum. Starting from kindergarten all students study a foreign language one period a day, either in Spanish or Chinese. It is the only elementary school in New York City that offers both Chinese as a Native Language and Chinese as a foreign language during the school day. 0  1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K310 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 409 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 6 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 9 School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 90.5% % Reduced Lunch 45.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.2% 7.6% 6.1% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.25 0% 9% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 61.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 94% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 50 50 98.1% 4.9% 10.8% 0.0% 86.1% 0.2% 4 9% 4.2 79.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In 2017-18 school year, our 3rd grade, 4th grade, and 5th grade NYS ELA test scores indicated that 59%, 80%, and 48% of the students scored at level 3 & 4 respectively. Among the three grades, our 4th graders made 10% gain. However, our 3rd graders had a decrease of 14% and the 5th graders had a decrease of 2%. In Math our NYS 3rd grade, 4th grade, and 5th grade Math scores showed that 73%, 84%, and 78% students reach grade level standards, achieving a 10%, 4%, and 4.2% gain respectively. As it was shown in a closer item analysis of the ELA test, we saw that our students did much better in multiple choice questions but did not do well in the extended response. In math, students did very well in the multiple choice questions, they still had trouble understanding word problems and explaining their thoughts in the extended answers. Finally, as per our 2017-18 NYSESLAT result, 34% of students passed the test. The analysis gave us a clear picture that through we have achieved significant gains in Math last year, we need to continue to improve literacy skills in order to support our students to achieve higher standards in reading, writing, math, and NYSESLAT exams. In order to continue to close the achievement gap between non ELLs and ELLs/SWD and properly prepare our students for the rigorous demands of the Common Core Standards and for college and career readiness, we are committed to work collaborative in our school community to meet the needs of all students.. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To move students toward meeting higher standards through rigorous and differentiated instruction By June 2019, all teachers will design and implement Common Core Learning Standards aligned, project-based learning opportunities with scaffolds and supports for all students; including students with disabilities, English language learners, and advanced students as evidenced by teacher observations and Advance 1e and 3c. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Analyze data from 2017-18 and baseline assessments to understand the gap between what students currently know and are able to do and the requirement of the Common Core standards; adjust lessons, units, and classroom assessments to address the gap; Engage in inquiry study during horizontal and vertical planning periods, use specific research and evidence based strategies and tiered interventions as needed for targeted groups of students; Teachers and paraprofessionals September, 2018 to June 2019 Principal and assistant principal Teachers and paraprofessionals September, 2018 to June 2019 Principal and assistant principal Through small group instruction, provide quality differentiated guided reading and writing instruction based on data analysis; students In all grades and content areas, plan and teach lessons and units that integrate the literacy and math Common Core instructional shifts where appropriate; Teachers and paraprofessionals September, 2018 to June 2019 September, 2018 to June 2019 Principal and assistant principal Principal and assistant principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Newsletter, Parent Orientation, Parent Teacher Conferences, and monthly parent workshops will include the academic goals of each subject areas, grade level standards, and applicable strategies that parents can use at home. These activities are on-going throughout the year. The key personnel for implementation and oversight includes the Parent Coordinator, grade level teachers, Principal and Assistant Principals. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy money will be utilized for per session activities and coverage, Title I SWP will be utilized for refreshments, materials, and children's books. Teachers and the administrative team will provide meeting, workshops and newsletters. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 4  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Analyze data from the Advanced data system to ...... Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Unit tests, F & P, Achieve3000, Student Progress Portfolio Binder, Benchmark Assessment, and on-going formative assessments are the instrument of measure. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We believe that establishing a highly effective and nurturing learning environment is essential to learning. Students learn best when they are conversant to the high expectations that are set for them. They have a purpose for learning and their learning involves both a process of discovery and mastery. Student learning can be greatly improved if they are engaged in a positive environment that is most conducive to learning and a risk-free setting that students feel comfortable and confident as learners. Learning is most successful when it is an active and self-conscious process, the instruction matches student needs and readiness, and students can implement developed skills that will allow them to pursue learning on their own and critically assess their own performance. To establish a positive classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers and to communicate the high expectations that we have for our students, we have undertaken initiatives, such as, Leaders In Me, anti-bullying workshops, assemblies and practices, and routines to continue to support our children's social emotional growth. Through data analysis, reflection, and planning, we as a school, continue to provide the whole school community with a positive learning environment, high quality of various services, and extremely collaborative team support. The impact of the work is tremendous: Our monthly workshops have an average of 60 participants; 98% of the parents attended each of the Parent-Teacher Conference; and a high level of parent volunteered activities throughout the years, including the bake sales, movie nights, Mothers’ Day and Father’s Day Celebration, Sports Night, Family Art Night, just to name a few. Our annual average of student attendance rate in 2017-18 was 98.4%. In last year’s School Quality Guide, we had a 94% and 100% parent and teacher participation rate respectively. Based on the results of this survey, we reached the scores of 4.55 on Rigorous Instruction, 4.70 on Collaborative Teachers, 4.95 on Effective Leadership, 4.57 on Strong Family-Community Ties, and 4.68 on Trust. As a whole, we are proud to know that being a school highly populated with ENL learners and SWD and without a single gifted and talented class in the building, we are currently in the front line on student achievement in the district. We will continue to build a supportive environment to ensure that there is strong trust in the community that teachers collaborate with each other, parents communicate with staff members, students feel comfortable with at least with one adult whom they can go to when they have concerns and doubts. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 6  By June 2019, PS 310 will continue to provide social-emotional supports for all students, including English language learners, students with disabilities and advanced students and develop a system to foster student leadership as evidenced in the student survey and measured by the School Environment Survey. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher teams work collaboratively to develop project-based learning units that integrate cross content knowledge and technology in the curriculum. students Parents From September 2018 to June, 2019 From September 2018 to June, 2019 Teacher teams and administrative teams Teacher teams and administrative teams Teacher, students From September 2018 to June, 2019 The teacher lighthouse team and student lighthouse team Parents are provided with workshops to learn about the project-based unit and the academic requirements before the launch of the unit. They will be provided with strategies to support their children's learning at home and will be invited to participate in the unit display and presentations. Student assemblies promotes care and trust among each other. Peer mediation and guidance counseling sessions are set up to provide a safe space for students to voice their concerns and feelings. The teacher lighthouse team work with the student lighthouse team to create a culture to ensure the development of whole child. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Through parent meetings, newsletters, school app and parent communication logs, teachers will actively communicate with parents with regards to their children's personal and academic goals, as well as their areas of growth and progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levey and Title I SWP will be utilized to support the achievement of this goal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 8  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Rubrics, checklist, student work, and conference note will be used as mid-point benchmark to evaluate student progress and the effectiveness of instructional practices. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Rubrics, student self-monitoring checklist, student work, product display and presentation will be the instrument of measure. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As an instructional leader, the principal strongly believes that high quality instruction is essential for improving student achievement. She conducts an ongoing needs assessment through survey feedback from teachers during the Summer Institute, analysis of student work and assessment data, conferencing with teachers individually during the Individual Planning Conference, frequent walk-throughs, and continuous discussions around refining pedagogy that supports student achievement. Based on these findings, the school’s Core Instructional Team, working in conjunction with the SLT, decided to focus our effort in aligning one of our school’s CEP goals to the 2018-19 school year Capacity Framework. Teachers work to the success and improvement of their classrooms and school, having the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. The school’s administrative team provides support through a variety of professional development opportunities, such as, our Summer Institute, frequent feedback to teachers through formative observation reports and individual conversations, on-site differentiated PD sessions, study groups, lab-sites provided by network achievement coaches, teacher leaders and the school’s administrative team. A year-long workshop series is planned and revised as needed to provide teachers with rigorous professional development opportunities during the designated Extended Day PD session on Mondays. Teachers also attend workshops given by the network and national conferences to further their learning in Special Education, Curriculum Mapping, and on how to move our agenda of aligning our work to the CCLS. We are looking forward to partnering with our city colleges and universities to broaden our view and knowledge of current research and promising practices nationwide. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Refine and develop systems and structures that foster collaborative professional learning in support of the school’s instructional focus and identify areas for teachers’ and students’ growth. By June 2019, all teachers will participate in data analysis on student work products, discern student strengths and weaknesses, research potential strategies and tailor instruction for all students; including students with disabilities, English language learners and advanced students measured by the state exam scores and Benchmark assessment. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Engage in activities that build a shared school-wide understanding of what effective teaching looks like in all content areas. Ensure teachers’ deep understanding of the components of Danielson’s Framework for Teaching included in the updated teacher evaluation and development system to help improve instruction and student learning;; From August 2018 to June 2019 - Ongoing Principal, Assistant Principal, Coach, and the Core Instructional Team Principal, Assistant Principal, Coach, and the whole instructional team, including teachers and paraprofessionals Provide support to teachers through frequent classroom visits, actionable feedback, coaching, and professional development aligned to Danielson’s Framework for Teaching, the Common Core, and other content standards; Provide teacher teams with differentiated PD opportunities, such as, inter-visitation, study group, inquiry work, and workshop sessions through multiple levels of teacher team meetings. The whole instructional team, including teachers and paraprofessionals From August 2018 to June 2019 - Ongoing the whole instructional team, including teachers and paraprofessionals From August 2018 to June 2019 - Ongoing Align supervisory practices to the teacher evaluation and development system; Principals and Assistant Principals Develop a structure that ensures a collaborative community where teachers work in teams to focus on analyzing students work and using specific student data to design effective strategies that scaffold instruction and improve student outcome. Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement From August 2018 to June 2019 - Ongoing From August 2018 to June 2019 - Ongoing Principal, Assistant Principal, Coach, and the Core Instructional Team Principal, Assistant Principal, Coach, and the Core Instructional Team Principal, Assistant Principal, Coach, and the Core Instructional Team Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 1  Through parent meetings, newsletters, school app and parent communication logs, teachers will actively communicate with parents with regards to their children's personal and academic goals, as well as their areas of growth and progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I SWP money will be used to continue the service provided by school app and the purchase and maintenance of technology devices and software. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teacher rating in “Advance”, PD feedback forms, inter-visitation forms will be used as mid-point benchmarks to measure progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance, PD feedback, inter-visitation feedback form will be the instrument of measure. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on an evaluation of the current curriculum we have used for the last few years in reading, writing, social studies, math, and science and the data analysis of the NYS ELA, Math, and Science exams, we have decided on continue to utilize the curriculum, which is a deviation from the suggested curriculum by the NYC central office. This is a joint decision made by the Principal, Assistant Principal, Literacy Coach, and teacher leaders. However, it is crucial that we develop a deep understand of the instructional shifts in both ELA and Math, work toward closing curricular gaps, and adjust the current materials so as to fully align the grade level content to the CCLS by including rigor, depth, and application of knowledge through higher order skills. Last year we continued to develop engaging, rigorous and coherent units of study and our project-based learning units with embedded literacy, science, and math tasks that align with the CCLS for all learners. The reflection on the implementation of these units has provided us with fruitful thoughts and information on knowing where our students were and the work that is needed to be done to move our students forward in meeting the challenging demands of the CCLS. The process of designing the units indicated areas that needed to be improved regarding teacher knowledge of curriculum writing and the CCLS, as well as strengthening the communication among the teams on creating content-rich interdisciplinary units of study. In addition, ATLAS, a web-based tool for curriculum mapping, has been utilized to design and share common core aligned curriculum maps across content areas. This has improved articulations among teachers, deepened the knowledge of CCLS and unit design and improved building capacity of best practices in pedagogy. This year we will refine these existing units, with an emphasis on social studies units aligned with the new NYC social studies scope and sequence. We will ensure that rigor is in each unit and that multiple entry points, higher level questions that promote critical thinking and differentiation are employed to reach all learners and prepare them for college and careers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Continue to refine and develop rigorous curriculum units in all subject areas that incorporate resources, instructional shifts, and performance tasks aligned to CCLS, pedagogies and practices that respond to how students learn best, and an instructional focus that addresses the needs of students. 3  By June 2019, PS 310 will continue to build coherent instruction to improve student achievement for all students, including English language learners, students with disabilities and advanced students measured by reaching the 80% success rate of the students gaining 1 year and 2 months grown in ELA and Math. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Provide professional development to all teachers in planning multiple access points and ways of demonstrating an understanding in the units of study so that all students engage in rigorous learning experiences; Analyze existing curriculum units in Rubicon/ ATLAS to align performance tasks and assessments to grade level standards as described in the Common Core Standards; Train new teachers on how to utilize Rubicon/ ATLAS, a web-based tool, to design and reflect on units of study that are aligned to the Common Core; Implement Common Core-aligned units that reflect instructional shifts in all content areas; 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School leaders, coach, and teacher s August, 2018 to June 2019, on-going School administrators and teacher leaders School leaders, coach, and teacher s School leaders, coach, and teacher s School leaders, coach, and teacher s August, 2018 to June 2019, on-going August, 2018 to June 2019, on-going August, 2018 to June 2019, on-going School administrators and teacher leaders School administrators and teacher leaders School administrators and teacher leaders How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school administrative team, the Parent Coordinator, and the instructional team will work collaborative with the School Leadership Team and the Executive Parent Teacher Association to plan school-wide activities and events that build a strong connection between the school and families and promote parent leadership and engagement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy, Title I SWP 5  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Advance teacher evaluation system, teachers’ mid-year feedback form, and assessment data will be used as mid-point benchmarks to measure school progress toward meeting this goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance teacher evaluation system and teachers' mid-year survey will be the instrument of measure. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Since the school was established seven years ago, promoting a high level of parental involvement and building a strong team among faculty have been priorities at our school. The results from last year’s Learning Environment survey indicated that we continue to make gains in communicating academic expectations to parents and building trust and collaboration among members in the instructional team, which resulted in an overwhelming average of 98% parental approval rate and 94% teacher approval rate. This year, in response to the five elements of the Capacity Framework we thrive to explore more activities that could foster the collaboration among our learning community as a whole, including all stakeholders, building leadership and nurturing a supportive environment where everyone can bloom to his/her potential. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Continue to foster strong family-community ties and provide the staff and students with a supportive environment where everyone thrives to their best potential By June 2019, PS 310 will continue to strengthen family-community ties and provide the staff and students with a supportive environment where everyone thrives to their best potential as evidenced in parent communication logs, School Environment Survey and parent feedback forms. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Establish student counsel, Go-Green Student Monitoring Team, Reading Partners, and library volunteers; Students Establish an effective system for teacher-parent communication parents Offer grade-specific parent workshops on academic expectations of various subject areas parents Continue to implement the “Leaders in Me” program to empower student learning Students and parents Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers From September 2018 to June 2019 From September 2018 to June 2019 From September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Grade leaders, parent coordinator From September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, and Lighthouse Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We will collaborate with CPC, BRIC and Salvadori to form partnership with parents and provide them with adult learning and parent-and-child learning opportunities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I SWP will be used to purchase residence program from the above Community-Based- Organizations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 8  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Parent-teacher communication log and parent feedback forms will be used as mid-point benchmarks to monitor progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent communication logs, parent survey and feedback forms will be the instrument of measure. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Mathematics Science Social Studies Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Guided reading and Strategy lessons for small groups Small group guided practice during the class and/or during extended day intervention Small group guided practice focusing on hands-on activities and vocabulary development Small group intervention When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day and during Tuesdays and Wednesdays during extended day During the school day and during Tuesdays and Wednesdays during extended day During the school day and during Tuesdays and Wednesdays during extended day During the school day and during Tuesdays and Wednesdays during extended day Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Regular small group guided practice during independent practice time; Two extended-day periods of 180minutes total every week Regular small group guided practice during independent practice time; Two extended-day periods of 180 minutes total every week Two extended-day periods of 180 minutes total every week Provided scaffolded instruction and multiple entry points during small group instruction on a regular basis during the day and during extended day intervention twice a week for a total of 180 minutes. 0  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) At-risk guidance and speech services are offered to students who have been approved by our school’s PPT team Pull-out individually or in small groups Twice a week for a total of 60 minutes during the school day Twice a week after school for a total of 90 minutes during the six-week program 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Historically we have about 3 students who live in temporary housing. However, we have about 46 families that live in double-up situation. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Entrance tickets, book packs with children's books, and opportunities for all afterschool programs and enrichment programs are first offered to these students. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In P.S. 310 all teachers are highly qualified as verified by the network’s HR Director. They hold valid NYS certification in the content area that they teach in. The BEDS survey is reviewed by the HR director who works with our school to ensure that teacher assignments are aligned with their license. We will continue to work with the network’s HR Director to ensure that all new coming teachers for next year are highly qualified and assigned with mentors to receive support and professional development. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). P.S. 310 provides on-going professional development opportunities to all personnel, including the principal, assistant principal, teachers, paraprofessionals, and other support staff by encouraging them to attend workshops and conferences offered at the network, citywide, and national level. Professional development topics include, but are not limited to, the following: ● Common core standards and instructional shifts ● Universal Design for Learning (UDL) ● Close Reading and Text Dependent Questions ● Differentiated instruction ● Backward Design and curriculum design ● Effective Strategies for working with ELLs and SWD ● Data analysis and data driven instruction ● Frameworks for Teaching 4  ● Advance and the new teacher evaluation system … Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Being a Title I school with 88% of students who are entitled to free lunch is an indication that most of our students came from families that do not have much resources. Some parents lack the availabilities to best assist their child’s social and emotional needs due to the fact their children were cared for by baby-sitters or relatives while they work in other states. P. S. 310 will coordinate and integrate Federal, State, and/or local funds to provide students with a mid-winter academy, after-school enrichment program, and Title I and Title III after-school programs to expose them to enriched opportunities in STEM related curriculum, projects, and various art media. In addition, through anti-bullying workshops and class discussions conducted by guidance counselor, students learned about violence prevention, strategies for anger management to better handle challenges along the way, and internet safety tips. Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The school has no Pre K program. However, we will offer orientation meetings to potential kindergarten parents that focus on pre K to kindergarten transition tips, child development, and social, emotional, and academic skills expected for incoming kindergarten students. Monthly newsletter outlining learning goals and school events will be also distributed to this group of parents. At the end of the year pre K parents and students are invited to visit kindergarten classes. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. At the beginning of the school year, in an effort to identify the need for professional development and identify the appropriate assessments and measures, teachers complete a survey. Based on the survey results the core 5  instructional team that is comprised of the grade level leaders, coach, AP, and the Principal, develops a yearly differentiated PD plan, appropriate multiple assessment measures that address school wide needs. Teachers participate in differentiated PD on Mondays to learn about the school-wide instructional focus, deepen their understanding on effective research-based strategies, and analyze data and student work in order to alter and adjust instruction. Assessment results are carefully studied periodically. This includes various summative and formative assessments, followed by an 8-week cycle of a rigorous Title I and Title III After-School programs. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 388,215.00 0 34,168.00 0 3,269,922.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 6  combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 20K310 The School For Future Leaders, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 20K310 The School For Future Leaders will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 8  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 9  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 20K310 The School For Future Leaders, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 0  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 1  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 3  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: For the proposed 2018-2019 Title III program, our students will focus on all English language skills with a concentration on speaking and writing. In order to address our findings, we plan to offer our ELLs the opportunity to attend our ELL Academy, which will be operated twice a week after school. Seven ENL and five content area teachers will be hired to work in this Title III program. The program will run from October , 2018 until February, 2019, every Wednesday and Thursday from 2:45 - 4:30 pm. Students will be grouped into small size settings with no more than 20 students per class, with an estimation of 250 participants. Teachers will be team teaching . All teams will be given preparation periods to write and aligned lesson that are content reach and scaffolds for ENL students. Sample afternoon- 40 minutes on rotation of MyOn, while teachers pull small groups for guided reading; In addition to teacher created lessons that will include, but are not limited to, finding the main idea(reading), writing clearly in English (writing), discussions of current events and personal stories (speaking) and listening for information (listening), our Title III program will continue My own for students. The instructional activities for students will include speaking and listening, phonics and word recognition, vocabulary, reading, spelling, reading comprehension, academic and basic vocabulary, with the support of rich visual support. Additionally, when needed, teachers will provide native language support during instruction, which is significant in a school with a large population of Chinese speaking students.. Myon places emphasis on developing reading comprehension and writing skills - both informally and formally. It also places similar emphasis on speaking during class discussions of poll results and debates. Through differentiation, Myon brings every student in the class together around the same topic, using interdisciplinary reading materials that are at 11 various reading levels. After students take the initial assessment, they each receive a reading passage on the same topic, on a daily basis, as per their lexile reading levels. For each passage they read and activities completed, assessment data is stored and analyzed. When a student advances a lexile level, a new level of reading material is generated and sent to him/her, as per findings. All records will be maintained including agendas, attendance sheets and invitations in parents’ preferred languages in a Title III binder Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 6  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: Teachers will continue to receive professional development on how to better implement and utilize Achieve 3000. Teachers using the program will be further trained for proper implementation, integration of our current core curriculum, data analysis of student achievement and program effectiveness. In addition, professional development will focus on research-based ELL strategies and on how to provide students with multiple entry points through Universal Design for Learning. Our school is committed to engaging our teaching staff in the development of lesson plans that consistently include language objectives in addition to content objectives and ensuring that the curriculum aligned to the Common Core Standards. Common prep periods are provided so teachers can co-plan the lessons that include academic vocabulary building, oral language development, and technology integration, strengthening the alignment to our core curriculum, and share best practices. The co-planning approach not only leverages expertise from both licensed ELL/Bilingual teachers and content area teachers, but develops the building capacity on interdisciplinary connection. Following are specifics of these professional development activities: All records will be maintained including agendas, attendance sheets and invitations in parents’ preferred languages in a Title III binder. Topic Schedule/Duration Audience Name of Provider/Facilitator 1. Myon Program continue Implementation November 6, 2018. 2. Scaffolding and Multiple Entry Points for ELLs November 12, 2018 2:45 pm – 4:00 pm All teachers Nekesha Bynum, 3. Intervention Program Planning and Lesson Planning November 20, 2018 2:45 pm – 4:00pm All teachers Yuqing Hong, Principal 4. Interim Assessment and Reflection: Data Analysis, Sharing of Best Practices, and Instructional ; Authentic Assessment with the ELL in Mind ; January 8 , 2019 2:45 pm – 4:00 pm All teachers 5. Program Effectiveness Evaluation and Wrap-Up 2:45 pm – 4:00 pm All teachers Program Supervisor Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our continuing efforts will focus on strengthening home-school relationships and increasing parental and community involvement. Parent workshops will be designed to bring the parent community (with a specific focus on reaching our parents ELL students attending Title III program). Our main goal is to have parents become involved and knowledgeable about the rich educational experiences that their children are being exposed to. We want them to be able to engage in meaningful conversation with their children. Parents of the participants are invited to 7  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities the program orientation so that they can be provided with an overview of the schedules, learning goals, and expected outcomes of the program. Parents will be invited to attend the after school classes with their children. In this way they too can learn alongside with their youngsters. Additionally, My on consist of a parent connection component where parents receive letters informing them of the units that their children's are currently in and the progress they have made. At the end of the ELL Academy, all parents are invited, through letters translated in the children's home languages, to participate in our end-of-the-program exhibit in which students reflect on what they have learned. 1. Parents are invited via all parents are invited, through letters translated to the children's home languages. The invitations are also made via the school's app. All information in the school's app and the website is translated into the parents' home language. 2. Workshops will take place on the following dates October 16, 2018. Topic - How to use and log into the school's website and app. The workshop will be translated into the parents home language. Monday, 11/12/2018 My own home connection. Parents will have the opportunity . 12/10/2018 NYSESLAT overview. 1/8/2019 ELA test over view 2/11/2019 Math test review; Parents will be able to see what the test looks like and how they can help at home. 3- All records will be maintained including agendas, attendance sheets and invitations in parents’ preferred languages in a Title III binder. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) NA  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other NA NA NA NA Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA NA NA NA NA 8 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA NA TOTAL NA NA 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 20 School Name The School for Future Leaders Borough Brooklyn School Number 310 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ms. Hong Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Hui Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Yaming Huang Teacher/Subject Area Mr. Wilosn Hung Related-Service Provider Ms.Margo Jacovino Superintendent Ms. Costantino Assistant Principal Ms. Lara-Lennon Coach School Counselor Ms.jia Xin Tan Parent Ms. Winnie Parent Coordinator Ms. M. Hang Field Support Center Staff Member Ms. Ettiene Other (Name and Title) Ms. Bynum, A.P C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 6 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 6 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 415 0 Total number of ELLs 195 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 46.99%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Mandarin If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 1 0 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 0 1 1 0 1 4 1 0 1 2 1 0 1 5 1 0 1 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 6 0 0 0 0 0 6 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? All students in grades K-2 are assessed by using the Fountas and Pinnell and in grades 3-5 we use Achieve 3000 to asses students' Lexile level three times a year. Teachers also utilize running records to track and monitor their students' progress. Teachers use the findings of this data to drive their instruction and to differentiate the level of teaching based on the needs of the students. We also use the NYC Performance Tasks to monitor students progress. In addition, teachers meet weekly to disseminate data and to plan future instruction. This year we will continue with Inquiry Teams to further analyze and utilize the available data to drive instruction. Six students on each grade will be selected, including ELLS and SWELLS, for the Inquiry Teamwork. Specifically targeted strategies will be implemented in an 8-week cycle. Students' progress will be monitored and strategies that prove successful will be implemented with other students. We will additionally use Goalbook Toolkit. This kit guides educators working with special education students, ELLs as well as SWDELLS to vary the levels of instructional support. It provides teachers with designing learning targets and instructional plans that respond to the different ways students learn and their individual needs. 1  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have instructional team meetings that meet once a month. The team is made up of administration, as well as grade team leaders. During these meeting the data is shared, strategies are discussed as well as progress made by students. When relevant and necessary these findings are also shared during monthly PPT meetings. The SBST attend these meetings providing their expertise on how to address the needs of the student. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We at P.S. 310 look at our data to carefully plan instruction and modify lesson planning and student grouping. While we do not have the data from the NYS math and ELA exam, last years we had 104 students become proficient on the NYSESLAT. Overall, our students' ELA and Math Statewide exam scores have improved by 10%. 29 scored at level 4, 66 at level 3, 66 at level 2 and 21 at level one. Because of these results, we will continue to implement our programs, which include, but are not limited to: The After school program, MyOn reading software, Achieve 3000, Math-In-Focus and Journeys, I ready and the mid-winter break academy. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have instructional team meetings that meet once a month. The team is made up of administration, grade team leaders, as well as subject area leaders. During these meeting the data is shared, strategies are discussed as well as progress made by students. When relevant and necessary these findings are also shared during monthly PPT meetings. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Through the use of informal assessments, teachers are able to track the ongoing progress of students regularly. Teachers are able to target the student's specific problem area(s), adapt instruction, and assist students within a short period of time. Students requiring more intensive and direct instruction are grouped in a small guided reading group, usually 4 to 5 students, and receive intensive instruction in an identified area of need. ENLs also receive native language support with the use of the bilingual library and during their foreign language class. Our library contains many books in Chinese and Spanish. The lowest 20% of ENLs receive level II RTI during extended days. Interventions are carried out to help a student master a specific skill. Teachers develop specific content learning goals for these students by using DIBELS and Math-In-Focus unit assessments/checklists as progress monitoring tools. Data is constantly analyzed to ensure that the students’ progress and reach the end-of-year goals. Our reading recovery teacher works with ENL and Non-ENL 1 st grade students. Students are assessed at the beginning and end of the instructional program cycle. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Based on last year's data. Kindergarten the students scored at the following levels: 31 are at the entering level, 4 emerging, 6 transitioning , 1 expanding and none at the commanding level. Our 1st-grade students scored at the following levels: 4 are at the entering level, 9 emerging, 5 transitioning, 18 expanding, 2nd-grade students scored at the following levels: 7 are at the entering level, 3 emerging, 14 transitioning, 17 expanding. 3 rd grade students scored at the following levels: 4 are at the entering level, 0 emerging, 8 transitioning, 15 expanding, and 17 commanding. 4th-grade students scored at the following levels: 7 are at the entering level, 0 emerging, 4 transitioning, 11 expanding and 30 commanding. For the most part, 5th students scored at the following levels: 2 are at the entering level, 4 emerging, 2 transitioning, 1 expanding and 28 commanding. The data reveals that we have a large percentage of expanding students (116) and an equal number at the entering level. There is a total of 96 students at the emerging and transitioning levels. We are waiting for the NYSESLAT results to see how many students will reach the commanding level. We will continue to help our students to move one level up by providing an after-school enrichment program using Title III funding. We will update all data once the 2017- 2018 NYSESLAT scores are released 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 2  We have instructional team meetings that meet once a month. The team is made up of administration, as well as grade team leaders. During these meeting the data is shared, strategies are discussed as well as progress made by students. When relevant and necessary these findings are also shared during monthly PPT meetings. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. English language exposure is provided to ENL students through contact with content area teachers who implement ESL strategies. ESL licensed content area teachers also push in to support ENLs during literacy and social studies periods. All ENL students are grouped heterogeneously in the Free Standing ESL classes. ESL instruction is delivered by a push-in and pull-out model and through a duly certified teacher that can provide the added ESL support through content area instruction. For example, Math is taught by teachers who possess an ESL license in addition to a content area. Math is taught eighth periods per six-day cycle for a total of 440 minutes for all classes. Additionally, ESL teachers push in during literacy blocks three times per six-day cycle for a total of 165 minutes per cycle. For our entering and emerging students, we also provide pull-out services for 2 periods ( 110 minutes ) a cycle. Most of our ENL students receive a total of 450 minutes of ESL instruction per six-day cycle, which exceeds CR-Part 154 concerning the mandated minutes required. b. TBE program. If applicable. In reference to Bilingual classes, the students are serviced by a certified Bilingual teacher during their daily literacy block for a total of 550 minutes per six-day cycle. Math is also taught by a Bilingual/ ESL teacher for a total of 440 minutes per six-day cycle An ESL teacher pushes into ELA and Science classes for two periods per week totaling 110 minutes. Native Language Arts classes are scheduled for 5 periods a week, for a total of 275 minutes. offering students instruction in either Chinese or Spanish. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? At P.S. 310 all ESL lessons are core curriculum, grade-appropriate and standard based. The ESL classes encourage language development, cultural adjustment, and literacy development. The ESL licensed content area teacher uses both languages for assessments to guide instruction and to form differentiated instructional groups. Instruction incorporates ESL best practices across subjects using ENL methodologies. All teachers are encouraged to co-plan during common planning periods. ESL teachers also have periods of team teaching to support students in content and language. They consistently use scaffolding techniques such as modeling, implementing TPR, using realia, engaging students in an accountable talk, activating prior knowledge, having students rotate around learning centers, and using manipulatives. Journeys, a very hands-on and visual literacy program, provides a much-differentiated set of lessons for all learners, especially ENLs. Each day the program focuses on phonics, vocabulary, sight words, grammar, a reading skills and writing. The program allows teachers to teach the same idea or skills but in different ways to accommodate learners of all levels to build phonics, phonemic awareness, fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension skills in reading. Additionally, native language support is provided to all students. ENLs are encouraged to express themselves using their native language, bilingual dictionaries are provided in all classes, and books in 3  both Chinese and Spanish are available for students to build background knowledge. Finally, our technology program, leveled books, and various hands-on club activities contextualize the instruction and make content accessible to all learners. ESL instruction for all ENLs is required under CR Part 154 Entering: 360 minutes per week, Emerging: 360 minutes per week, Intermediate: 180 minutes per week, and Expanding: 180 a week and Proficient continue to receive services for an additional two years. *However, our students receive above the minimum requirement in order to inspire growth, understanding, and progress. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ESL teachers plan their lessons with the general education teachers to make sure that all of the content areas are covered. The Principal has provided each teacher with a schedule to follow. Within that schedule, each ESL class must be provided with 8 periods of literacy, 6 periods of math, 3 periods of science, 3 periods of social studies, 3 periods of art, and 5 periods foreign language in either Chinese or Spanish. The bilingual class is provided with the same schedule, except the bilingual class is given 5 days of native language studies in Chinese. In both the ESL and bilingual classes, social studies are integrated with the literacy program. Science and math are also integrated, when possible. Twice a six-day cycle all classes take a technology class and integrate math on one day and literacy on the other. When possible, ENL students are provided in his/her native language to support further understanding. When native language support is not available, TPR and manipulative are used. The bilingual class has instruction 60% of the day in Chinese and 40% in English at the beginning of the school year. This changes as the year progress and as the student's English language proficiency develops. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Teachers use native language and various media to assess the ENL’s content knowledge and skills. ENL’s are also encouraged to express their ideas and understanding in their native languages, by acting out, and through pictures. Assessments are differentiated based on their language proficiency levels and learning styles. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status (a) SIFE - We do not have any SIFE students as of yet. However, when we do, we will have a plan in progress to ensure SIFE students’ needs are met. P.S. 310 will make sure every SIFE child receive additional services and intervention needed to help the student perform on grade levels standards. (b) Newcomers enjoy how welcoming our school is for them. Many of our teachers speak Chinese and Spanish. This is very comforting for new children who do not yet speak English. These newcomers are given the opportunity to learn content specific subjects in English and Chinese. In both the bilingual and ENL classes, newcomers read books in Chinese. Native language libraries provide students with opportunities to build background knowledge and learn about content knowledge while they are still in the early stages of the English language proficiency level. Students also have access to language technology programs such as MyOn, Iready and Achieve 3000. In order to help newcomers teachers provide as much scaffolding as possible. We provide phonics every day to promote decoding. Our use of the word wall, Read-Aloud and guided reading all help develop academic language for our newcomers. Every day classes begin with a morning message or informal conversation to improve the students’ social and survival oral language skills. We use rhymes, songs, and poems to develop phonemic awareness and phonics skills, accelerate letter identification, read-aloud shared reading, and a peer-language buddy to develop early literacy and English language skills. We also have books on tape to promote listening and fluency skills. In addition, our students use Award Reading integrated with their technology periods. This program promotes shared learning experiences and small group work focusing on reading fluency, comprehension, phonics, visual literacy and technology. We believe that if we give our students a strong background in English and native language skills through phonics and literacy starting in Kindergarten, they will be ready to perform and meet 4  the standard on the 3rd-grade state exam. (C) Developing - In addition to the aforementioned offerings for newcomers, students receiving ESL services also receive after-school intervention services two times a week, on Wednesdays and Thursdays. Students are grouped according to reading and ESL levels and are provided with additional support. Student’s weakest areas are identified by formal and informal assessments, including Fountas and Pinnell and periodic assessments. (D) Long-Term ENLs - We do not have any long-term ENLs. We strive to implement a rigorous curriculum for all students, including ENLs, to best prevent them from becoming long-term ENLs. However, when and if we ever do, we will have a plan to address the needs of Long Term ELLS. P.S. 310 will make certain that every ELL receives additional services and interventions needs to help the student perform on grade level standards. (E) Former ENLs - Students who have passed the NYSESLAT are transitions for the next two years. These students continue to receive ESL services in order to support their academic growth. These students also continue to receive extended time on state exams. Additionally, these students continue to receive native language support through the use of native language books to strengthen their skills in acquiring and using academic language and continue to benefit from our afternoon academic enrichment programs as well as the Mid-winter and Summer Academies. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Students with IEPs receive ESL services through content instruction with a total of 450 minutes per six-day cycle. Students who are at the Entering level receive extra small group support through push-in ESL teachers during ELA periods three per six-day cycle for a total of 165 minutes. The IEP is used to set individual goals for each student, to offer differentiated instruction, and to focus on the child’s needs. Instruction is delivered using best practices such as scaffolding, building on prior knowledge and native language support. The ESL teacher and Special Education teacher monitor the child’s progress through their SMART goals. Individual plans and goals are created to meet the needs of each child. Their curriculum is the same as the other classes. However, their tasks are broken down into small steps and require more scaffolding, with more attention being paid to details or with a different focus. Some of the students in the ICT class receive speech therapy. Besides receiving the services, the special education teacher provides rhymes, songs, and chants to help the student develop stronger oral language. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At P.S. 310 all ENL-SWD students receive an appropriate education in the least restrictive environment. All students and staff members work together in an encouraging way while working towards common classroom goals. All stakeholders, teachers, staff, and administrators differentiate curricular and instruction. Administration works to ensure that a flexible schedule is made available to meet the diverse needs of ENL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. All teachers have common planning time, grade conferences, and team meetings to collaborate and plan instruction. The curriculum is modified, when necessary, to accommodate and meet students’ needs according to their IEP. Teachers write and know all goals and objectives of the students that they are working with and ensure that all students master and meet their goals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. P.S. 310 uses data for targeted ELL interventions. Classes are established based on this data. ESL and bilingual teachers plan and co-teach with content specific teachers. Students receive small group instruction such as guided reading, skills groups, listening centers, and workstations. ENLs receive native language support with the use of the bilingual library. Our library contains many books in Chinese and Spanish. In addition, the lowest 20% of ENLs receive level II RTI during extended days. Teachers develop specific content learning goals for these students and use DIBELS and Everyday Math unit assessments/checklists as progress monitoring tools. Data is constantly analyzed to ensure students’ progress and reach their end-of-year goals. We have one Reading Recovery teacher will continue to work with first graders including ENLs and students of varying language proficiency. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 5  P.S. 310 has no plans to add any additional programs at this time. We will continue to work on improving our guided reading practice by providing all teachers, including those working with SWDENLs and ENLs, with professional development on building vocabulary for ENLs, and on how to conduct guided reading for ENLs who have very limited language proficiency, but might not be so behind in literacy skills in their native language. This year our focus will continue to be on writing skills for all our students including SWDENLS and ENLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? P.S. 310 has no plans to discontinue any programs at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All of our ELL students are offered equal access to all of our school programs. They are held accountable to the same performance levels and standards as the mainstreaming students. The majority of the school population are ENLs or former ENLs; therefore, curriculum in all subject areas is developed with ENLs in mind to help meet their needs and accelerate their learning. Our after-school programs are open to all ENL students and are designed to enhance their learning. Students scoring at level 1 and 2 attend our two-day extended day program. This program is designed to assist students in moving forward academically in Math and ELA. Our enrichment programs are also open to all ENLs and are designed to give our students the opportunity to experience learning as well as cultural activities that they may not otherwise have the opportunity to. The enrichment program includes the following: BRIC Arts and Crafts - This program provides the students with interdisciplinary experiences through visual arts. Students will study various artists and their work and learn how to make puppets, masks, printmaking, etc. Reader’s Theatre - Children learn to write skits from their favorite stories. They will then use vocal expression to help the audience understand the story through sets, costumes, and intricate blocking. These activities foster the development of language skills, presentational skills, and collaboration. Dance - Born to Jive - This class introduces students to various styles and basic Jive dance. The students develop the ability to focus, sequence, transition and recall through enjoyable movement activities. In addition, the students learn the fundamental footwork and rhythmic hand positions that can be applied to all other dances. Chorus - Students learn to make connections between different styles of music, language arts, and music history. They have the opportunity to engage in activities that develop skills such as a natural singing, freedom of breath, intonation, diction, and ease of personal vocal production. Robotic Club - Students in the Robotic after-school program will work in the areas of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM). The Robotic Club gives the students the opportunity to create movable robots through designing, assembling, and programming. Salvadori STEM program – Animal Habitat - Through project-based explorations involving concrete and real-world challenges, students learn about different animal habitats around the world. They will apply what they learn in different content areas to develop sustainable environments for animals that are endangered. Last year we were again the recipients of the NYCDOE Art Grant for SWDELLs. With this grant, we Partnered up with TADA. The students at our school. PS 310 have experienced visual art, music, and dance. However, they have had little experience with theater. Theater activities benefit all students, especially ELL student in a number of ways, including fluency practice, comprehension, engaging in a story, and focusing on vocal and physical expression. Through this residency, our students had the opportunity to further develop their language skills as well as other academics skills. By participating in this program students had the opportunity to further develop their writing skills by engaging in writing scripts for their final performance. Students will learn about the steps of writing a play such as character profiles, plot, setting and play structure. Research also shows that ENLs need practice with oral academic language in order to succeed in school. The practice of this skill is critical and while we incorporate oral language skills in everyday lessons, students participating in the theater program will have an additional opportunity to further develop this skills. In addition to building social and communication skills overall, involvement in performances has been shown to improve students’ self-esteem as well as their confidence in their academic abilities. This aligns well with the Leaders in Me program, which continues to be a school initiative for this upcoming academic year. We have applied for this grant again this year and hope to be recipients. Budget pending, we are also having a mid-winter ELL academy as well as a Summer Institute. Students will be invited to attend four instructional days. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 6  There are a variety of instructional materials used to support ENLs. The school has ordered many leveled books and decodable readers to help ENLs acquire language and build early literacy skills. Manipulatives in Math, ELA, and Science provide ENLs with the opportunities to explore concepts in differentiated ways and thus enhance their learning. Students also receive 110 minutes a week of technology instruction focusing on language arts and math. Children engage in interactive activities while reading electronic books through the MyOn program as well as Achieve 3000. They may watch brief video clips or use visual aids to stimulate visualization based on the class lesson or to build background knowledge. Technology is also used in the classroom as the children learn through interactive computer programs on a variety of topics. These programs include workbooks, picture cards, songs, charts, and graphs as well as learning computer skills. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is encouraged in each of the program models. In the Transitional Bilingual classes, students receive 275 minutes per six-day cycle of Native Language Arts. In addition, Bilingual teachers preview and review strategies, skills and concepts during the NLA periods to enable transferring of skills and knowledge in English. Students are encouraged to use native language to communicate their learning and to clarify understanding. The ENL and ICT/ENL classes are able to receive native language support when the ENL or Bilingual teacher pushes into the classroom, using a bilingual dictionary and books in the children’s native language. As a strategic plan, the school has hired many teachers who have dual licenses and with bilingual skills to team up with those who are monolingual, common branch teachers. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All our programs are designed to build the reading fluency and comprehension of the ENL students. Instruction is conducted in English for these programs. The Balanced Literacy program involves having the children learn to read via shared, guided, and independent reading models, as well as word study and phonemic awareness. P.S. 310 provides ENL services to all our students for the required hours according to NYSESLAT levels. Additionally, instructional materials such as Journeys by Houghton Mifflin Harcourt are used for all our grades. These materials provide extra ENL support and instruction that promote language development. The certified ESL teachers for all our grades utilize a variety of instructional techniques, strategies and ESL methodologies to enhance the academic performance of all our students. P.S. 310 teachers use instructional techniques that include, but are limited to modeling, scaffolding, bridging, contextualization, schema building, text representation and metacognitive development. Through a thematic approach to teaching, students are taught the four modalities of language: reading, writing, listening and speaking by using the aforementioned instructional techniques. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? There are a variety of instructional materials used to support ENLs. The school has ordered many leveled books and decodable readers to help ENLs acquire language and build early literacy skills. Manipulatives in Math, ELA, and Science provide ENLs with the opportunities to explore concepts in differentiated ways and thus enhance their learning. Students also receive 110 minutes a week of technology instruction focusing on language arts and math. Children engage in interactive activities while reading electronic books through the MyOn program as well as Achieve 3000. They may watch brief video clips or use visual aids to stimulate visualization based on the class lesson or to build background knowledge. Technology is also used in the classroom as the children learn through interactive computer programs on a variety of topics. These programs include workbooks, picture cards, songs, charts, and graphs as well as learning computer skills. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We provide a nurturing environment in our school and classrooms to assist newly enrolled ELL students. We make certain that translators are provided for parents and that students are paired up with a buddy who speaks their language. In this way, the newly enrolled ELL students feel comfortable and if they need help, they can ask their buddy. Additionally, half of our teachers are bilingual, which results in providing ample support to both students and parents. 7  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer a foreign language to all ENLs in our school including SWD students, 5 times in a six-day cycle, for a total of 275 minutes a week. Students can choose to learn Chinese or Spanish during the foreign language instructional periods. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Teachers at P.S. 310 receive ongoing professional development in ESL methodologies. Teachers are also encouraged to attend PD sessions during the school year. Our professional development beginning with a summer institute, All teachers are invited to attend an intestine 3-day summer institute, From August 28, 2018, to August 30, 2018. Faculty conferences address classroom concerns such as helping newcomers, promoting literacy and social-emotional development for ENL students. The Principal shares professional articles and information with all staff members. Teachers are encouraged to sign up for training pertaining to their interests and needs. Our teachers have participated in national conferences, network PDs, and summer institute. Furthermore, our entire staff has attended Common Core Curriculum PD to align literacy with the National Standards to ensure rigor. Our summer institute focuses on improving teacher effectiveness and differentiated instruction for all, including ENLs and ENL-SWDs. Because of the large percentage of ENLs in our school, all teachers receive professional development that is relevant regarding how to work with ENLs. The core instructional team collaboratively developed an annual professional development plan that addresses the needs of the ENLs. For example, the tentative topics for the month of October the topics are as follows: Monday, 9/11/18 Inquiry Team How to conduct an inquiry team; including students with IEPs, in addition to Bilingual and ENL students. Monday, 9/10/18 Differentiated PD Session 1: Reading & Writing an IEP with Ms. W. Hung in room 405 Session 2: Integrating Visual Arts Across the Content Areas including visual for ENLs- with Ms. Venezia in room 301 Session 3: Small Group Instruction with Ms. Bynum (*for paraprofessionals) in room 407 Monday, 9/17/18 Grade Meetings We will meet in the library (Room 401) from 2:45-3:10 p.m. to discuss facilitating and running effective grade meetings. Then the staff is to report to his/her grade leader's classroom. Reading and Implementing an IEP with Mr. Hung r in room 405 (*for paraprofessionals) Every month we carefully review the needs of our students and teachers and plan professional development to meet those needs. A more complete PD plan will be updated once it has been finalized. 8  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school's guidance counselor provides support to students, parents, and teachers as a way of making the transition from elementary school to middle school as smooth as possible. She plans and delivers workshops for all stakeholders. (1) In addition to the PD description on question 2, all of the teachers at P.S. 310 are provided with school-based professional development that supports them in working with all types of students and learners. This includes our ENL, SWD, as well as our Bilingual students. P.S. 310 takes pride in our Professional Learning Community Session Description guide, which provides detailed information regarding all of the professional development opportunities that are available throughout the year. Teachers are also encouraged to attend PD sessions during the summer. Faculty conferences address classroom concerns, such as helping newcomers catch up, or promoting literacy and social-emotional development. School administrators send emails with information concerning available PDs and professional reading. Teachers can sign up for training pertaining to their interest and needs. (2) This summer our entire staff will attend a summer institute professional development to engage in the further understanding and unit development of the Common Core Curriculum and to align literacy with the National Standards to ensure rigor. In addition, ELL teachers prepared with other teachers to ensure that there is an alignment with the core curriculum. (3) Last year we had our third graduating class. Our school guidance counselor worked diligently with teachers, students, and parents to ensure that our children experience a smooth transition into middle school. Parents received workshops on how to help their children choose the best middle school to meet their academic as well as language needs. (4) In addition to in-house professional development, all teachers are encouraged by the administration to attend outside professional development to meet the hours of ELL training as mandated by Part 154 guidelines. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The parental involvement in our school is strong. Over 300 of our parents attended the curriculum orientation, ELL program selection, PTA meetings, and Autumn Festival and multicultural show. Our PTA and SLT hold monthly meetings to discuss how the PTA and SLT will work in collaboration with our school to provide an enriched educational experience for our youngsters. Our school is working with community-based organizations such as BCA, Fidelis Care, and neighborhood clinics. These clinics have expressed interest in wanting to host meetings on hygiene and health care. We have also set up Family Fun Night at our school where students can come and play math games, participate in art activities and enjoy a night with their parents where they learn about developing literacy skills. Recreational activities will also be available such as ”Art family Night." This will allow families to come together and have fun at no cost to them and in a safe environment. Parental involvement activities address the needs of parents. We strive to provide professional development to parents based on the parent survey sent at the beginning of the school year. The school provides monthly meeting based on what parents want to learn. Some of the topics include but limited to How to use Achieve 3,000, My own, and I ready. How to maintain students reading and math levels during the summer, summer safety just to name a few. All meetings are translated by Parent coordinator, Principal, and Assistant Principal. 9  Monthly newsletters are also sent home in efforts to keep parents abreast of what is taking place in the school and the community. All newsletters are translated. At the beginning of the school year, parents are invited to visit classrooms and talk to teachers about the upcoming school year's curriculum. Four times a year parents attend Parent-Teacher meetings to discuss their child's progress. We evaluate the needs of parents through the Parent Survey, formal and informal conversations and feedback from them. There is regular, two-way meaningful communication involving the student's academic learning and other school activities ensuring that parents play an integral role in assisting their child’s learning. All communication is done in the parent’s native language. Translation services are available via the Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Spanish Teachers, ESL teachers, and paraprofessionals. We also send home a monthly newsletter with all of the pertinent information regarding our upcoming school activities. A goal setting sheet is sent to families three times a year. All forms are sent to them in the parent's home language. An English Language Learner binder is kept with all materials and resources that help to identify and place English Language Learners into the program selected by their parents. This includes, but is not limited to, in-person meetings, phone calls and letters sent home. We additionally have a school website that is updated weekly as well as a school app. The APP Express enables parents, students teachers and administrators of the school to quickly access the resources, tools news and information to stay connected and informed all information is translated to meet parents needs. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ll ELL parents are involved in the following, also stated in question 1; The parental involvement in our school is strong. Over 300 of our parents attended the curriculum orientation, ELL program selection, PTA meetings, and Autumn Festival. Our PTA and SLT hold monthly meetings to discuss how the PTA and SLT will work in collaboration with our school to provide an enriched educational experience for our youngsters. Our school is working with community-based organizations such as BCA, Fidelis Care, and neighborhood clinics. These clinics have expressed interest in wanting to host meetings on hygiene and health care. We have also set up Family Fun Night at our school where students can come and play math games, participate in art activities and enjoy a night with their parents where they learn about developing literacy skills. Recreational activities will also be available such as” Art Family Night." This will allow families to come together and have fun at an affordable price and in a safe environment. Parental involvement activities address the needs of parents because parents are always wondering how they can help their children at home with there school work. By providing them with Family Fun Night, we will provide the necessary resources for them to help their child. At the beginning of the school year, parents are invited to visit classrooms and talk to teachers about the upcoming school year's curriculum. Four times a year parents attend Parent-Teacher meetings to discuss their child's progress. We evaluate the needs of parents through the Parent Survey, formal and informal conversations and feedback from them. There is regular, two-way meaningful communication involving the student's academic learning and other school activities ensuring that parents play an integral role in assisting their child’s learning. All communication is done in the parent’s native language. Translation services are available via the Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Spanish Teachers, ESL Teachers, and paraprofessionals. We also send home a monthly newsletter with all of the pertinent information regarding our upcoming school activities. A goal setting sheet is sent to families three times a year. All forms are sent to them in the parent's home language. An English Language Learner binder is kept with all materials and resources that help to identify and place English Language Learners into the program selected by their parents. This includes, but is not limited to, in-person meetings, phone calls and letters sent home. We additionally have a school website that is updated weekly as well as a school app. The APP Express enables parents, students teachers and administrators of the school to quickly access the resources, tools news and information to stay connected and informed all information is translated to meet parents needs. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 0  1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Yuqing Hong, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Schools For Future Leaders School DBN: 20k310 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ms. Yuqing Hong Title Principal Ms. Mariana Lara-Lennon Assistant Principal Ms. Mei Han Parent Coordinator Ms. Olivia hui ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Christina O'nofre Parent Mr. Wilson Hung Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Yanming Huang Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Ms.Jia Xin Tan School Counselor Ms. Costantino Ms. Perez-Medina Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 3  DBN: 20k 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: 310 Superintendent: Ms.Costantino The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Mariana Lara -Lennon AP yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. PS 310 has 56% of students that are English Language Learners. The indicators that we have used to assess our school's written and oral interpretation needs are through ATS reports, language survey forms, and observations of parents who need assistance when registering their children. Other observations have been noticed during PTA meetings and school events where parents were invited to attend. We have also used parents surveys asking parents the language they prefer to use when communicating with the school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 4 Percent Written Percent Oral Oral Preferred Language Written Preferred The major findings of our school's written translation and oral interpretation needs are Chinese mandarin and Chinese Cantonese, Spanish, and Arabic. The findings are reported to the school community via faculty meetings, the school leadership team, and during parent workshops. 234747269YANGALEC04404ZENGHONG MEIY0211OTHER RELATIVEMNMANDARINCHCHINESE/ANY 245833348YANGBENSON0K013LIUZEYINGY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 239514565YANGRINA02201JIANGWEN QINGY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 238052245YEBETTY03302CHENHAI CHUNY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 239235500YEELIVIA03303LEERACHEL XIAO YIY0101MOTHERNOENGLISHNOENGLISH 239235500YEELIVIA03303YEYONGY0102FATHERCNCANTONESENOENGLISH 245720982YEGRACE0K012WANGPING MEIY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 245421508YEJOY0K013YANGLI NAY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 247408701YEMINA01102YEYAN JINY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 244656856YEXIAO TENG01103LEERACHEL XIAO YIY0101MOTHERNOENGLISHNOENGLISH 244656856YEXIAO TENG01103YEYONG QUANY0102FATHERNOENGLISHNOENGLISH 244514378YGLESIAJOSEPH0K013ESPINAL ORTEGAMARIANELYSY0101MOTHERSPSPANISHSPSPANISH 242815405YGLESIAJOSHUA02201ESPINALMARIANELYSY0101MOTHERSPSPANISHSPSPANISH 230855652YIPANGEL04401YIPCUI YINY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 238901888YUANGELA03302CHENYING HUAY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 234434215ZAFARMUHAMMAD04401TAHIRAZAFARY0101MOTHERUDURDUUDURDU 237650304ZHANGANDY03301LI MINGZHANGY0102FATHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 243225851ZHANGELLA01101CHENYUNY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 243319134ZHANGEMILY01102LINYINGY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 241970862ZHANGENHUI01103ZHANGHANY0102FATHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 241970862ZHANGENHUI01103GUOJINGY0201MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 241415348ZHANGIVY02202LIHUO MEIY0101MOTHERMNMANDARINCHCHINESE/ANY 5  241415348ZHANGIVY02202ZHANGJIN CHAOY0102FATHERMNMANDARINCHCHINESE/ANY 241415348ZHANGIVY02202ZHANGMENG QINY0310SISTER/BROTHER 208815779ZHANGJAKE03301CHENHANGY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 239172414ZHANGJAYCEE03303ZHENGMEIY0101MOTHERMNMANDARINCHCHINESE/ANY 243855558ZHANGJENNIFER01103HEMEILINGY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 239808561ZHANGJONATHAN03303LINYINGY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 239808561ZHANGJONATHAN03303ZHANGCHUAN MINY0102FATHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 245421094ZHANGJONSEN0K013CHENYUNY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 224913996ZHANGJOYCE04401ZHANGCHRISY0102FATHERNOENGLISHNOENGLISH 239693815ZHANGMANDY01101TANGYU HUANY0101MOTHER 224140038ZHANGSHU YING05504ZHONGMIAO LIANY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 224735555ZHANGTIM05501CHENHANGY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 237118112ZHANGXIAO JIA05503GUANYINGZIY0101MOTHERMNMANDARINCHCHINESE/ANY 242721454ZHANGXUHAO04403ZHANGDANY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 245230859ZHANGZIKI01103LIYAN LINY0101MOTHERMNMANDARINCHCHINESE/ANY 242236248ZHAOCALVIN01101HUANGMEI FANGY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 239211378ZHAOCONSTANCE03301ZHAOJIEY0102FATHERCNCANTONESECHCHINESE/ANY 237501317ZHAOGAVIN04403ZHAORU KANGY0102FATHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 237501317ZHAOGAVIN04403ZHAOLI JUANY0111OTHER RELATIVENOENGLISHNOENGLISH 237356597ZHAOYUE TING05504RENYU LANY0101MOTHERMNMANDARINCHCHINESE/ANY 243113164ZHENJIANJUN04403ZHENMEI JIAOY0103GRANDPARENTCNCANTONESECHCHINESE/ANY 243666054ZHENGALAN02201XUSHUY0101MOTHERMNMANDARINCHCHINESE/ANY 244656864ZHENGALEXIS01102CHENGDORAY0101MOTHERMNMANDARINCHCHINESE/ANY 242013944ZHENGBOWIE01102CHENLINGY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 6  240021550ZHENGDANIEL02201LIZHUAN YINGY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 237550330ZHENGDANNY03301CHENWEN HUIY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 237550330ZHENGDANNY03301ZHENGZHENG QIUY0202FATHERMNMANDARINCHCHINESE/ANY 245081286ZHENGDORI0K013LUCHAO LINY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 241765940ZHENGFIONA0K013LIYANY0101MOTHER 244579181ZHENGJAYDEN0K012ZHENGJIA YUANY0102FATHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 239669187ZHENGJERRY02201LINBING QINY0102FATHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 208471334ZHENGJONAH05504ZHENGXIAO YUNY0101MOTHERMNMANDARINCHCHINESE/ANY 244656286ZHENGKELLY0K011WUYEU HUAY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 233864297ZHENGNICOLE05503LINANNAY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 233864297ZHENGNICOLE05503ZHENGDIANY0102FATHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 233864297ZHENGNICOLE05503YANGBAO XIANGY0103GRANDPARENTCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 235609823ZHENGSHAO HAN04403ZHENGYU RUIY0102FATHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 244382578ZHENGSHERRY01102ZHENGQIAOYUNY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 241867753ZHENGSOPHIE01103LINBING QINY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 245679717ZHENGSOPHIE04401ZHENGJIN QIUY0101MOTHERMNMANDARINCHCHINESE/ANY 205527187ZHENGTINA05503RONGWANG XIUY0102FATHERMNMANDARINCHCHINESE/ANY 215801754ZHENGVINCENT LI04403XUEJIN QINY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 245003025ZHENG WUZI QING03302WUPIAOXIAY0101MOTHERCNCANTONESECHCHINESE/ANY 245003025ZHENG WUZI QING03302ZHENGBING YUANY0102FATHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 209202399ZHONGMIA05504ZHONGYONG ZEY0102FATHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 245605019ZHOUDAVID0K013LUFANGBINY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 242030278ZHUASHLEY01103CHENMEIZHUY0101MOTHERCHCHINESE/ANYCHCHINESE/ANY 235604568ZHUTYRONE03301ZHUJIN XIAY0101MOTHERMNMANDARINCHCHINESE/ANY Spanish Cantonese Spanish 7  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. none Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Though all NYCDOE letters are available in several languages, all school notices are translated by staff members and parent volunteers. Monthly news letters are sent on the first Additionally, the signs and information in the school's main corridor have been translated for parents as well. of each month In accordance with Chancellor's Regulation A-663, the school provides critical communication in a timely manner for any of the languages other than English, in which assistance is needed. 9/10/2018 10/1/2018 11/1/2018 12/1/2018 We will continue to provide parents with translations in the three most frequent languages as identified by our findings. Translation in these languages will be done by either outside vendors or in-house school staff, depending on availability. Following are some examples of school documents that are translated: 1/1/2019 2/1/2019 3/1/2019 4/1/2019 5/1/2019 a. Due process notices 6/1/201 b. IEP notices As previously stated' monthly news letters are send on the first of the month. We also make use of the PS310 APP. The app sends daily reminders of activities that are happening in the school and in the classrooms. The information in the APP get translated in Mandarin and Spanish . We also have a school website that provides important information to parents. Additionally, parents are provided with translation daily as needed and requested, 8  c. Student intervention - letter from teachers to parents d. Monthly Newsletters e. Attendance notifications School-Wide Exams notifications September 7 Handout for parent meetings First of every month Parent orientation meetings September 7 In addition to the above mentioned, all documents are translated in house by Certified Bilingual Pedagogues and Parent coordinator, In addition to the above mentioned, all documents are translated in house by Certified Bilingual Pedagogues and Parent coordinator. In addition to the above mentioned, all documents are translated in house by Certified Bilingual Pedagogues and Parent coordinator, 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide This year we anticipate the following formal face-to-face meetings with parents; a. Parent-Teacher Conferences b. Curriculum Day meetings c. Monthly PTA meetings d. Monthly SLT meetings f. Weekly meetings during parent engagement time First of every month and on as needed basis . Telephone contacts with parents before or after school First of every month and on as needed basis . interpretation service(s)? As previously stated' monthly news letters are send on the first of the month. We also make use of the PS310 APP. The app sends daily reminders of activities that are happening in the school and in the classrooms. The information in the APP get translated in Mandarin and Spanish . We also have a school website that provides important information to parents. Additionally, parents are provided with translation daily as needed and requested, We also make use of the PS310 APP. The app sends daily reminders of activities that are happening in the school and in the classrooms. The information in the APP get translated 9  Planned one- to- one meetings First of every month and on as needed basis . Face-to-Face letters First of every month and on as needed basis . in Mandarin and Spanish . We also have a school website that provides important information to parents. Additionally, parents are provided with translation daily as needed and requested, We also make use of the PS310 APP. The app sends daily reminders of activities that are happening in the school and in the classrooms. The information in the APP get translated in Mandarin and Spanish . We also have a school website that provides important information to parents. Additionally, parents are provided with translation daily as needed and requested, We also make use of the PS310 APP. The app sends daily reminders of activities that are happening in the school and in the classrooms. The information in the APP get translated in Mandarin and Spanish . We also have a school website that provides important information to parents. Additionally, parents are provided with translation daily as needed and requested, 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We at PS. 310 make use of the school's APP, the website and make phone calls to reach parents of limited-English proficiency in case of an emergency Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 0  All staff members receive training beginning August , during our summer institute . Additionally, The LAC coordinator shares with staff information on how to use the Language translation and interpretation unit, during our monthly meetings. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) As previously stated' monthly news letters are send on the first of the month. We also make use of the PS310 APP. The app sends daily reminders of activities that are happening in the school and in the classrooms. The information in the APP get translated in Mandarin and Spanish . We also have a school website that provides important information to parents. Additionally, parents are provided with translation daily as needed and requested. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents are integral stakeholders in our school community and we value their feedback. We use parent surveys during monthly meetings to gather information from them about our translation and interpretation services and their needs. 1 
