 21K337 School Name: INTERNATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AT LAFAYETTE Principal: JON HARRIMAN   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The International High School at Lafayette 332100011337 9 through 12 School Number (DBN): 21K337 2630 Benson Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11214 718/333-7860 Phone Number: 718/333-7861 Fax: Jon Harriman jharrim@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: Jon Harriman Jean Lee Juana InesXicaraLopez JuanaInesXicaraLopez SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Carmen Baez NourElgamal Wong Huang Liu Amy Gallagher District Information Geographical District: 21 Superintendent: Kathy Rehfield-Pelles Superintendent’s Office Address: 335 Adams Street, Room 508, Brooklyn NY 11201 Superintendent’s Email Address: krehfield@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-923-5102 Fax: 718-923-5145 Field Support Center (FSC) Affinity Group Alexandra Anormaliza FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5941 Phone Number: 718-935-5618 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Jon Harriman Jean Lee Juana InesXicaraLopez Carlos Franco Carmen Baez NourElgamal Wong Huang Liu YishongLi KamlaOubaha Arturo Flores Codova Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent   Matthew Hoffman Patricia Ibarra Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/Social Worker Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The International High School at Lafayette is a vibrant learning community that supports all students in linguistic, intellectual, creative, and socio-emotional growth in order to achieve academic, professional, and personal fulfillment and success.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The International High School at Lafayette utilizes a content-based ENL program for our recent immigrant ELL students. Teams of teachers (five on each team) design and implement their own standards-based, interdisciplinary, project-based curricula for the 75-80 students they mutually share. All classes are taught in English and teachers in all content areas infuse their curricula with ENL methodologies and strategies for language development. Most course work in the classroom is completed in cooperative learning groups, where students are heterogeneously mixed (by language, academic level, gender, and ethnicity) so as to optimize opportunities for language development. All core academic classes (English literature, math, science, social studies, and the arts) meet four times weekly for 60 minutes each. This year we will serve approximately 374 recent immigrant students in 9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th grade. These students come from 39 foreign countries. The largest groups came from Uzbekistan, China, Guatemala, Pakistan, and El Salvador. We have increased our graduation rate by 25% over the past four years, we have a very strong college and career readiness index, we have a well-established pedagogical practice for supporting our various specific needs groups (i.e., ELLs, Students with Interrupted Formal Education, unaccompanied youth, social-emotional), and we have a multitude of programs offering a wide range of support and opportunity for students and family. Our key partnerships include iMentor, New York Cares, International Rescue Committee, Clinic Plus, and Bridge To College. Additionally we are part of the International Network for Public Schools, which is a network of International schools that collaborates on best practices and professional development. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The International High School at Lafayette utilizes a content-based ENL program for our recent immigrant ELL students. Teams of teachers (five on each team) design and implement their own standards-based, interdisciplinary, project-based curricula for the 75-80 students they mutually share. All classes are taught in English and teachers in all content areas infuse their curricula with ENL methodologies and strategies for language development. Most course work in the classroom is completed in cooperative learning groups, where students are heterogeneously mixed (by language, academic level, gender, and ethnicity) so as to optimize opportunities for language development. All core academic classes (English literature, math, science, social studies, and the arts) meet four times weekly for 60 minutes each. This year we will serve approximately 374 recent immigrant students in 9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th grade. These students come from 39 foreign countries. The largest groups came from Uzbekistan, China, Guatemala, Pakistan, and El Salvador. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our major areas of growth in this past year have been in three areas of the Framework for Great Schools. First with regard to strong family-community ties we expanded greatly our outreach to families--specifically through the formation of a committee that involved a representative from each grade-level team, we were able to generate systems of outreach that reflected all grades and provided families with increased communication, especially with regard to the academic work happening within the school. Second, we invested heavily in deepening our work with regard to collaborative teachers. Every teacher in the school designed at least one interdisciplinary project, following specific professional development and planning time. Finally, we focused on an increasingly supportive environment through our 3rd year of work with the Learning Partners Program and the clarification of core values and revision of our mission statement. Both of these undertakings involved students, families, teachers, and other stakeholders. For the 2018-2019 school year, we again plan to focus on three specific aspects of the Framework for Great Schools. First we are prioritizing the groundwork that we've established in the realm of supportive environment. With our work on the mission statement and the core values we are now planning on moving our work into deepening our understanding of our students' experiences, both academically and socially. We will also strengthen our work with rigorous instruction through inquiry and action/research professional development groups. Finally we will focus on 0  effective school leadership through the creation of a professional development committee to represent the various stakeholders and perspectives of the community. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 21K337 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 337 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 7 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 90.8% % Reduced Lunch 83.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 32.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 25.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 20% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 62% 4% 63.0% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 5 3 90.1% 3.3% 3.6% 4.7% 35.9% 0.9% 2 16% 4.4 N/A N/A 74% 0% 84.1% 10% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A YES YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school has many strengths with regard to the development of rigorous and coherent curricula aligned to the CCLS, instruction within and across disciplines and grades, and strategic action planning with regard to data analysis that informs instruction. These strengths include careful curriculum mapping that is both vertically and horizontally aligned, peer inter-visitations two times per year, extensive professional development, and careful scheduling to allow for meeting time and analysis of data and assessment tools. During the course of our observations and surveys of staff, there was a demonstrated need for additional support on how the educational and cultural backgrounds of our students impacts their ways of learning in the classroom. Teachers had a wide variety of questions on how this impacts student learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 100% of teachers will have participated in an inquiry project related to the cultural background of students and how it impacts their educational experience as documented by inquiry reflections and feedback cycles including impact on student learning. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Develop overview of inquiry work for marking period 1 as well as outline of inquiry and action/research possibilities for marking periods 2 through 4. Teachers August 2018 Literacy Coach, AP, and Principal, PD Committee Members Set inquiry group topics and memberships All Staff All Staff February 2019 Literacy Coach, Discipline Leaders Provide professional development sessions on areas of focus connected to inquiry work All Staff Review feedback on inquiry work as well as impact on student learning and plan for upcoming year. All Staff March 2019 June 7, 2019 Literacy Coach, Team Leaders Literacy Coach, Discipline Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 4 October 2018 November 2018 November 2018 PD Committee Literacy Coach, Principal, AP Literacy Coach Dec 2018 Literacy Coach, Parent Coordinator PD committee finalized inquiry groups and topics Set individual, inter-grade team, and department team goals with regard to inquiry work Facilitate workshop for families to better understand the emphasis on cognitive engagement within the school and ways to support students in this work. Review feedback and cycles of inquiry to determine areas of strength and growth for term 2. All Staff All Staff All Staff, Families  By June 2019 two workshops connected to the role of culturally responsive education in the school and ways to best support students will have been provided by key staff members in multilingual settings. The literacy coach, team leaders, and assistant principal will be responsible for the implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources will include the literacy coach as well as support from the Internationals Network for Public Schools, iMentor, and the College Access for All program and Mastery Collaborative. and Instructional and educational resources will include professional readings on effective planning of projects as well as the online curriculum development system Atlas and the online outcomes based assessment system Jumprope. Schedule adjustments will be the utilization of the weekly professional development time. Additionally in order to facilitate professional development outside of the school, per diem substitutes will be scheduled. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Following the February 2019 Chancellor’s Day, the literacy coach, and Principal will review the feedback on the inquiry cycles and action research documentation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The instrument of measure will be the documentation of PD participation, the completion of the inquiry reflection sheet by all teachers, pilot group interview with students on level of engagement, and a review of the observations done by administration. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. With regard to this tenet our school has a multitude of structures in place to support social and emotional well being and to foster healthy relationships in an environment conducive to academic and social/emotional growth. These structures include a full-time social worker, two guidance counselors, and a team of 4 mental health professionals through Clinic Plus. In addition to having out-of-classroom personnel brought on to support student social and emotional wellness, IHSL worked with the Learning partners program through the 2016-2017 school year to explore our teachers' use of restorative practices to help teachers to provide additional social-emotional support in the classroom and continues to build on this work. In the 2016-20017 School Quality report 94% of our students reported feeling safe in their classes at school, and 96% reported that their teachers treat them with respect, which is 10% higher than the borough's average. 2. For the upcoming school year the priority is to deepen the understanding of our teachers with regard to the experiences of our students and then to utilize that understanding in designing meaningful instruction and creating classrooms that are more supportive of all. In the School Quality Report only 59% of the students said that teachers in most or all of their classes will support them when they are upset. 3. As described in #1 above, there are many structures, policies and practices in place to support this work. Connected specifically to our area of focus, we also have a comprehensive intake process that we engage in for our new students to better understand their experiences prior to coming to our school, and we work closely with various organizations which allow greater insight into the lives of our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 6  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 all teachers will have completed a four part series on deepening our understanding of our students and their experience, which will result in a 10% increase in the average Danielson rating in the domain of Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport (2a). 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Guidance team will schedule and develop a series of professional development sessions on understanding the experiences of our students as well as research relevant organizations that can provide support. Implementation of first of PD series on intake interviews for new students. Teachers, guidance counselor, and other staff All Staff Reflection on intake interviews and implications for teaching. All Staff Implementation of second of PD series on Danielson 2a. Implementation of third and fourth of PD series provided by outside agency and student and family presentations. Review of progress on Danielson 2a as well as reflections from PD series and impact on instruction. Staff, Student, Families Students, Staff, Families Students, Staff, Families September 2018 Guidance Team, AP September 2018 October 2018 December 2018 February-April 2019 Guidance Team, AP Guidance Team, AP Principal Guidance Team, Parent Coordinator, SLT, CBO Coordinator May 2019 Guidance Team, Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. By June 2019 our families will have participated in a workshop that provides an overview of work on culturally responsive education and also been involved in the creation and implementation of one of the four PD sessions. The timeline for the workshop is February to April of 2019, and the key personnel will be the parent coordinator, the School Leadership Team, and the Guidance Team. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 8  Human resources—Guidance team will be heavily involved in this process; instructional resources—materials/texts to support training; schedule adjustments—coverages for intervisitations and in-house training; CBO coordinator will work with organization led PD; organizations and trainings provided by various agencies; journals and other materials for reflection Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our mid-year benchmark will be 95% of the staff with at least five hours of PD in restorative circles and 1 project completed with clear connections to the core values of the school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The progress will be measured by reviewing student work from each teacher from projects that highlight the core values, and this information will be stored and monitored through a shared spreadsheet within our Google Drive system. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. With regard to this Framework element, IHSL has a number of practices that are firmly established in our school culture. Since the founding of the school, collaboration has been a key element of both teacher and student learning. Grade-based team meetings are held weekly and serve as the main vehicle for making decisions in our school related to discipline and instruction. In addition, discipline meetings are held bi-monthly to allow teachers to establish curriculum and alignment across the grades. Because of this, the NYC School Survey has consistently reported that our teachers and students report a high level of collaboration between teachers. With regard to increasing the level of collaboration in the 2018-2019 school year, the priority for the upcoming school year is to concentrate on small group inquiry-based professional development connected to needs assessment and a deeper understanding of the experiences and backgrounds of our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 100% of teachers will have completed an inquiry cycle with a small group of colleagues on a shared topic connected to an agreed upon area of interest and culturally responsive education, and each group will identify a baseline of student achievement related to the inquiry cycle and set a goal for the span of the inquiry work. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Discipline (department) leaders will work with administration to assemble sources of data which staff will review in order to identify tentative areas of focus. Professional development session will be provided to connect inquiry work and culturally responsive education. Teachers will identify areas for focus with regard to inquiry work and small teams will be formed in order to establish concrete goals and methodology. All Staff September 2018 Discipline Leaders All Staff All Staff September 2018 Discipline Leaders, Social Worker, AP November 2018 Discipline Leaders, Instructional Coach Teams will jigsaw and share out methodology and goals with staff and also prepare information for open school night presentation. All Staff January 2019 Discipline Leaders, SLT, Parent Coordinator, Instructional Coach Mid-year review of interdisciplinary projects through a gallery share and feedback cycle. All Staff February 2019 Instructional Coach, Discipline Leaders Documentation of impact of inquiry cycles will be presented to full staff. All Staff June 2019 Discipline Leaders, AP 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. By June 2019 inquiry groups will have met with families to discuss areas of focus and integrated feedback of parents and guardians into methodology, and all families will have received an overview of the individual projects and their implications. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will utilize funds for a full time literacy coach, and per diem for substitutes to allow for inter-visitations and additional common planning time for key staff members. We will also reach out to CBOs for support for our initial phase. Technology will be utilized for shared documents and feedback to various inquiry projects as well as creation and publication of information being distributed to families. 1  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By mid-year all staff will have established inquiry groups, formulated goals, created a methodology for the work, and shared progress through a jigsaw mechanism with all other staff. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure will be the specific goals of the inquiry teams as well as their methodologies of research and implementation. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our vision is closely tied to the core principles of the Internationals Network for Public Schools, which emphasizes language development through content, project-based learning, differentiation and scaffolding, and real-world connections. Our team structure is a crucial component of the work that we do at the International High School at Lafayette. Each grade team has five teachers that work with a cohort of approximately 90 students. This team consists of a math, science, arts, social studies, and English teacher, and they have weekly meeting time to give feedback and revise curriculum, discuss social/emotional support mechanisms, outreach to families, and coordinate team activities, such as experiential learning through field trips. Based on our needs assessment, one area of growth is to integrate clearer roles in the team in order to better distribute the responsibilities and also provide support that is targeted to various tasks within the team, specifically with the goal of creating a professional development committee that brings together all stakeholders. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 the professional development committee will have a documented cycle of comprehensive supports for all teachers within the school, including their mechanisms of outreach to various stakeholders and integration of these perspectives in the PD cycle/plan, which will lead to a 5% increase in the response of teachers identifying PD as consistent and sustained. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Meet with team and discipline leaders to review last year's roles and end of year reflections. Then establish specific tasks/roles for the professional development committee All Staff August 2018 All Team and Discipline Leaders Review prior year professional development plans and establish norms and expectations for professional development committee. Professional Development Committee September 2018 Instructional Coach and Principal Meet monthly in order to update professional development plan and organize PD as well as get feedback from staff on quality and impact of PD. All Teachers, PD Committee October through May 2018-19 Complete reflections in May regarding process and impact of professional development committee. All Teachers May 2019 Instructional Coach and Principal PD Committee Members, Instructional Coach and Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. By June 2019 the school will work with the SLT in order to integrate their feedback on the PD plan as well as the effective structuring of the committee. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources: literacy coach; schedule adjustment: time built into schedule for mentoring; per session for meetings with literacy coach for development of resources; technology to facilitate meetings as well as documentation of work; professional development for support of committee members in facilitation; professional readings and texts Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X Title III, Immigrant 4  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The mid-point assessment will be an analysis of the goals and a meeting with the members of the PD committee as well as survey of staff on impact of the committee work. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Meeting notes and feedback for each committee member will allow an assessment of progress towards each stated goal for the year as well as midyear and end of year reflection. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. With regard to the tenet on strong family and community ties, we are proud of the work that we have done in creating a school culture and climate where families, community members and school staff collaborate to support all student in both their social/emotional well being, as well as their academic progress. Our school is a welcoming space with an open-door policy. We communicate with families through frequent translated phone calls and messages, and utilize extensive partnerships, including iMentor, Girls Write Now, and IRC Our action plan with regard to family and community ties is to raise the level of communication with families, especially through translated mailings and newsletters. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 families and guardians will have received quarterly newsletters rather than semi-annual mailings as compared to the prior school year, with the timings of these newsletters arranged to impact the engagement of families for open school events leading to a 10% increase in average attendance for open school and family events. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Establish a calendar for quarterly newsletters as well as themes and topics to include. All Families September 2018 In September facilitate a workshop for families at open school night/afternoon on outcomes based assessment and our online grading system, Jumprope. In addition, conduct a survey with returning family members about the previous forms of communication and content in order to establish priorities. All Families October 2018 In November reach out via phone and letter to families to get feedback on communication and other areas of interest. All Families November Continue with mailings and end year with survey as well as summary of open school events attendance. All Families 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018 January through June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Representative from each grade level, principal, AP Students, representatives from each grade level, parent coordinator, principal Parent coordinator, principal Parent Coordinator, Principal If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Atlas DIY, Arab American Association, French Heritage Language Program, the Mayor's Office of Immigrant Affairs, Goodwill, the Lutheran Social Services, and IRC Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources: parent coordinator, grade-level representatives; laptops and desktops, software system Jumprope, translation of documents; funds for printing out mailings, technology for creating newsletters, funds for printing photos; CBO coordinator Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X Title III, Immigrant 7  C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 there will be a 10% increase in families participating in open school events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. As a staff we will monitor the surveys and feedback from families as well as attendance/participation in open school events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) 1. Before/after school tutoring 2. Literacy Selective 3. Literacy pull-out class 1. Tutoring 2. Small group 3. Small group 4. Small group 4. Explorers Club 5. Small group 5. Writing Center 1. Before/after school tutoring 2. Statistics Elective 1. Tutoring 2. Small group 3. Small group 3. Interactive Math Elective 1. Before/after school tutoring 1. Tutoring 2. Small Group 2. Living Environment Selective 1. Before/After School Tutoring 2. Global Review Selective 1. Tutoring 2. Small Group 3. Small Group Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Formative assessment, credit accumulation, Regents grades (where applicable), portfolio outcomes, teacher input, scholarship report Formative assessment, credit accumulation, Regents grades (where applicable), portfolio outcomes, teacher input, scholarship report Formative assessment, credit accumulation, Regents grades (where applicable), portfolio outcomes, teacher input, scholarship report Formative assessment, credit accumulation, Regents grades (where applicable), portfolio outcomes, 1. Before/after school 2. During school day 3. During school day 4. Weekends 5. Before school 1. Before/after school 2. During school day 3. During school day 1. Before/after school 2. During school day 1. Before and after school 2. During school day 3. During school day 9  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) teacher input, scholarship report Referrals by teams of teachers, individuals, social worker, guidance, or at student/ family request 3. Global Issues Class 4. Small Group 4. Weekends 4. Art and History 1. Group Discussions with Social Worker 1. Individual 1. During school day 2. Individual 2. Counseling with Social Worker 3. Planning Conferences with Guidance Counselor 3. Individual 2. During school day and after school 3. During school day and after school 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 112 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide backpacks, sweatshirts, sweatpants, school supplies, free lunch, full fare metrocards Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We are a Title I School 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  We provide backpacks, sweatshirts, sweatpants, school supplies, free lunch, full fare metrocards 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We are a Title I School 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. IHS recruits highly qualified teaching candidates through both the NYCDOE Open Market System and via the Internationals Network of Public Schools (INPS), a non-profit organization that oversees and coordinates activities amongst the NYCDOE’s 15 International High Schools. Through our membership in INPS, we have access to resumes of the school system’s most highly qualified pedagogues with vast experience working with ELLs, who solely comprise all of the International High Schools student populations. IHS’ rate of teacher attrition is low, due to opportunities for teacher leadership and high quality professional development. Our teacher-led personnel committee invites interested candidates to visit our classes so they can observe students engaged in classroom instruction and to teach demonstration lessons. All constituents of our school staff participate in interviews of promising candidates. Hiring decisions are made using consensus. Our Literacy Coach provides targeted professional development for all new teachers and other teachers on a case-by-case basis. The Coordinating Council, IHS’ ruling body, is comprised mainly of representatives from each of the school’s interdisciplinary teaching teams, but also includes representatives from guidance, disciplines, administration, standing committees, students and parents. Thus teachers have great decision-making power in establishing, maintaining and altering school-wide policies. Further, professional growth of all pedagogues is fostered on two levels: weekly subject area discipline meetings and weekly interdisciplinary grade level team meetings. During common prep periods, all teachers of the same subject area discipline meet and follow protocols in order to analyze and provide feedback on each other’s curriculum, with a critical eye towards meeting the tenets of the Internationals Approach, as well as the school-wide goals as informed by the INPS rubric. Teachers also meet in their teams weekly in order to discuss student progress. They examine the work of their mutually shared students. In this way, all of a student’s teachers come together to discuss his or her progress, as well as look for broader patterns in student learning that can be altered to improve student achievement. Because each team contains at least one ENL -certified teacher, each team member, regardless of subject area certification, learns about ENL strategies to further enhance instruction across disciplines. All teachers also receive specialized training in ENL strategies and working with ELLs through network-wide professional development through the Internationals Network for Public Schools. They provide workshops during the summer, Election Day, and at various times throughout the school year through after-school seminars and teacher inter-visitations (peer observations at various IHS’s. 3  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We offer a number of professional development opportunities within our school which begins with teacher goal setting. Teachers set goals using the Danielson framework after self-assessing on this rubric. They develop goals based on 3 areas of growth. They are observed a minimum of 6 times per year where they receive feedback and next steps. They are partnered with peers for peer observations to give each other feedback in their areas of growth at least 2 times per year. They meet weekly in subject area teams and in grade-level teams to plan, share and revise curriculum based on the CCLS and review student work and data connected to the CCLS. In addition, the PD committee plans bimonthly full-staff PD that supports teachers in the Common Core shifts. Finally, we also reach out to our partners, Internationals Network for Public Schools, New York State Performance Standards Consortium, Mastery Collaborative, QTEL, Facing History and Jumprope for ongoing PD in helping our work to become more closely aligned to the CCLS. Mastery Collaborative Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 4  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Subject area teams meet a minimum of once weekly to discuss curriculum and assessment. Teams work together with the support of administration to choose common assessments to help track student progress. In addition, because we follow a standards-based assessment model, students are given multiple opportunities to achieve learning goals through a variety of assessments. Subject area teams regularly plan assessments and review data multiple assessment measures tied to these standards. Over the past year, the PD committee, made up of teachers, has worked to create staff-wide PD to support teachers in this work 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $416,222.00 0 $34,864.00 0 $2,377,029.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool 5  to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school . The International High School at Lafayette, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The International High School at Lafayette will support parents and families of Title I students by: · providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; · providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; · fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; · providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 7  · sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; · providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: · Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; · engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; · ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; · support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; · maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; · conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; · provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 8  · host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; · schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; · translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; · conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: · holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; · hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; · encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; · supporting or hosting Family Day events; · establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; · encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; · providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; · developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; · providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The International High School at Lafayette, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support 9  of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards and Assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: · using academic learning time efficiently; · respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; · implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; · offering high quality instruction in all content areas; · providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: · conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; · convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; · arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; · respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; · providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; · involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 0  · providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; · ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff · ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; · notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; · arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; · planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: · creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; · assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); · sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; · supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; · ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; · advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 1  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities · monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; · ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; · check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; · read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); · set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; · promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; · encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; · volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; · participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; · communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; · respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; · become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; · participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; · take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; · share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: · attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 2  · complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; · follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; · show respect for myself, other people and property; · try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; · always try my best to learn. · by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; The International High School at Lafayette, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. IV. School Responsibilities Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: · using academic learning time efficiently; · respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; · implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; · offering high quality instruction in all content areas; · providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: · conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; · convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; · arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; · respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 3  · providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; · involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; · providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; · ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: · ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; · notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; · arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; · planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: · creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; · assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress · supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; · ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; · advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 4  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 8 4 4 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The International High School at Lafayette utilizes a content-based ENL program for our recent immigrant ELL students. Teams of teachers (five on each team) design and implement their own standards-based, interdisciplinary, project-based curricula for the 75-80 students they mutually share. All classes are taught in English and teachers in all content areas infuse their curricula with ENL methodologies and strategies for language development. Most course work in the classroom is completed in cooperative learning groups, where students are heterogeneously mixed (by language, academic level, gender, and ethnicity) so as to optimize opportunities for language development. All core academic classes (English literature, math, science, social studies, and the arts) meet four times weekly for 60 minutes each. In addition to our core academic class offerings, students have an elective class which meets twice a week for 60 minutes. During these periods, we offer Native Language support in Chinese and Spanish. This year we will serve 350 - 360 recent immigrant students in 9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th grade. Our recent immigrant ELL students in grades 9-12 who are struggling both academically and linguistically have been invited for the following supplemental Title III programs: -----Effective Literary Writing for ELLs (three hours per week, Monday, Thursdays, and Friday from 8:00 to 9:00, beginning September 27th and ending June 10 th , which is 81 sessions). This supplemental program is focused on supporting students in their development of literary writing, especially with regard to comparing works of literature, supporting claims with evidence, articulating counter-claims, using literary elements, and following conventions of English language. This program is designed for 11th and 12th grade ELL students. It is based on concern about the English Regents scores for our ELL population. The program will focus on ELLs that have not yet passed the English Regents, with an emphasis on 11th and 12th grade students. It will be taught in English. The enrollment number will be 25. This program will involve one ENL teacher and one ELA teacher. The teacher will utilize novels, journals, notebooks, poster paper, markers, and videos for the course. -----Saturday Explorers' Club for ELLs (Five hours every first Saturday of the month from 10AM to 3PM, and every Thursday afternoon from 3:50PM to 4:50PM, beginning October 25th and ending June 1st , which has 10 sessions). This supplemental program is for recently arrived ELLs with limited English skills and struggle with literacy and numeracy, and it is designed to develop their understanding of the new city they live in and develop language needed to get around this city. It will be taught in English. This program is designed for 9th grade newly arrived ELL students. Part of the rationale for the course is to support students knowledge and skill development to prepare to be successful in school and their new city. 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information This Title III program will be team taught by two ENL teachers. The materials required include museum admissions, notebooks, poster paper, markers, rulers, five iPads, and paper. The curriculum will include how to use the subway and read a MTA maps, history of immigration and Ellis Island, and neighborhoods of New York City all while developing basic interpersonal communication skills. The students will take trips on the first Saturday of each month to the Museum of Modern Arts, Brooklyn Bridge and Chinatown, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Brooklyn Museum, Ellis Island, as well as other sights in various neighborhoods. On these trips they will study the topics in the previous paragraph respectively. -----Numeracy and Literacy for Entering ELLs (Tuesdays and Fridays, from 3:50 to 4:50PM, starting September 18th and ending in May 24 th , which is 62 sessions) This supplemental program will be team taught by an ENL teacher and a math teacher. They will integrate mathematical numeracy skills with ENL to supplement the work that is happening during the school day. In our analysis of the Regents exams, Entering ELLs averaged a score of 64 last year, and this program is designed to support students with stronger numeracy as well as literacy skills. There are 38 students in the program, and the program is taught in English. The program will be taught by one ENL teacher and one Content teacher. The materials needed are five iPads, math workbooks, Spanish/English math dictionaries, graphing poster paper, regular poster paper, 10 graphing calculators, 30 four-function calculators, math manipulatives, and journals. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Four of the Title III teachers of ELLs will participate in the four day QTEL Building the Base in February 2018. This will start February 18th and go through February 22nd. It will be from 9am to 3pm. It will cover the development of basic literacy skills. Five of the Title III teachers of ELLs will participate in four sessions of professional development sponsored by the Internationals Network for Public School. These sessions will be on November 6th , December 13th , February 14th , March 20th , and June 18th . Each session will be from 10 to 4. INPS is a nationally recognized leader in ELL instruction. The topics covered will include project design for ELLs, integrating language and content, supporting native language development, and effective assessment strategies. During weekly professional development sessions, teachers participate in workshops related to best practices and ENL methodologies for recently arrived ELLs. This time is part of the contract and built in to the school schedule, so it is at no additional per session. During one workshop each semester, outside vendors like International Network for Public Schools will facilitate the training. This facilitation will be at cost to the school. All in-house agendas and attendance sheets for professional development workshops will be collected by administration twice a month. Staff attending workshops outside of school will 7  Part C: Professional Development return agendas and attendance upon return. The QTEL program is no-cost, and specific professional development opportunities from INPS must be funded by the school. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: One parent engagement activity will be ESL for families, which will be used to provide language development through the technology for parents as well as tools for supporting their children in language acquisition. The classes will be every Wednesday evening, beginning in December and going through May from 6pm to 7:30pm. The course will cover basic English language skills as well as strategies to support students in the coursework. Parents will be notified through the mailing of translated letters to their homes. The course will be taught by one ENL teacher. Another parent engagement activity will be computer classes for parents, which will be used to support parents in developing computer literacy skills in basic programs such as Microsoft word as well as the use of the internet for job search and email. Additionally families will be taught how to access student information systems, such as the schoolwide grading system and the DOE resources. This will be taught by an ENL teacher, and it will be on Thursday evenings, from 6pm to 7:30pm, from November 1st to May 23rd. It will be taught by an ENL teacher, and the parents will be notified via translated letters sent to their homes. For each of the above events, flyers in all home languages, will be sent home and distributed during family events. In addition, we will Robo-call in home languages to tell the families about the events. After the events start, we will maintain records with sign-in sheets that are collected by administration twice a month. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 8  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 21 School Name International High School at Lafayette Borough Brooklyn School Number 337 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jon Harriman Coach Kathlyn Clark ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Amy Gallagher Teacher/Subject Area Matthew Hoffman/Social Std/ESL Teacher/Subject Area Tracy Post Teixeira/ESL Related-Service Provider Melissa Bala Superintendent Kathy Rehfield-Pelles Assistant Principal Coach type here School Counselor Wing Man Choi Parent Zamira Mirvaliev Parent Coordinator Carolina Bobe Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 13 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics 0  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 352 Total number of ELLs 310 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 88.07% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use a common assessment designed and assessed by our teachers in order to guide our instructional planning. This assessment is aligned to the outcomes for all ELLs, and it is assessed by all teachers in order to determine the academic and linguistic needs of our students. Additionally we use the SIFE intake data to determine the curriculum. Finally we use curriculum-embedded assessments that are aligned to the rubrics from the Internationals Network for Public Schools, which are coordinated with common core standards. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 1  We have bi-weekly department time with an ENL teacher in order to design effective curriculum based on analysis of assessments. We have weekly grade-level team meetings, also with at least two ENL teachers, to review curriculum and provide feedback for revision and targeted support. We also have a full-time ENL coordinator and coach. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our program is measured through the analysis of a wide array of data sources, including: • Graduation rate above 70% for 4 years. • Course pass rate for all grades at about 85% or higher. • Attendance rates - around 90% • Learning Environment Survey – student results • Learning Environment Survey – parent results • Learning Environment Survey – teacher results • Dropout rate • Student anecdotals School Progress Report data According to the recent New York State Report Card, our students have a Performance Index (PI) greater than the Annual Measurable Objectives (AMO) determined by the State. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Targeted elective courses are utilized to address the needs and skills of students. Additionally our ENL coordinator reviews data and provides feedback to teachers and teams of teachers in order to strengthen the support. Finally resources, such as technology and other programs, are researched and integrated into the classroom work to support ENL students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A: We have grades 9-12. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our NYSITELL data indicates that 74% of our very new arrivals are Beginners. Nearly all of these Beginners scored 0 in listening, reading, and writing. After this, the most crucial pattern we see is one of improvement – the vast majority of students do better on the NYSESLAT each year, showing that students’ language is developing as a result of the Internationals Approach employed at our school. Closer analysis of the NYSESLAT Modality scores reveals a disparity between the listening/speaking and reading/writing scores. In the 9th grade, most students score within the Intermediate level for Listening/Speaking, but fall within the Beginner level for Reading/Writing. This pattern continues in the 10th grade where the majority of students scoring higher in the Listening/Speaking category than in the Reading/Writing category. In 12th grade, the pattern of students scoring higher in Listening/Speaking, than Reading/Writing remains. As mentioned above, this data informs our curriculum and the need to continue to develop reading and writing skills though all content areas in addition to our after school programs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL coordinator meets with the grade level teams to review the findings and determine next steps. Additionally the ENL teachers review the outcomes within the departments as well as the grade level teams. Finally full staff meetings are utilized to better understand the data connected to our ELL programs. Part IV: ELL Programming 2  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. . Instruction: a. Instruction at our school is delivered collaboratively by teams of four to six teachers who work to plan instruction for groups of approximately 75 students. b. Our school uses all of these program models. Each group of students is block programmed and those students travel together throughout the day. Within their blocks, 9th and 10th grade students are mixed, as are 11th and 12th grade students. The blocks are heterogeneous but at various times teachers may choose to group students within the block homogeneously if that suits the students’ and block’s needs for a specific project. c. Integrated and Standalone ENL are implemented: Beginning/Entering students will receive a minimum of 540 minutes of ENL per week (this consists of 180 minutes of ENL standalone, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 180 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL (with ELA or any other content area). Low Intermediates/Emerging will receive 360 minutes of ENL per week (this consists of 90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area. Intermediate/Transitionsing will receive 180 ENL minutes per week which consists of 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area). Advanced/Expanding will receive 180 minutes of ENL per week which consists of 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. Proficient/Commanding or students who are former ELL's will receive 90 minutes of ENL each week which consists of 90 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2. Mandated Instructional minutes: As per the new CR Part 154 requirements, beginning September 2015, students will be carefully programmed to receive the mandated ENL and ELA instructional minutes based on new proficiency guidelines. Beginners/Entering students will receive a minimum of 540 minutes of ENL per week (this consists of 180 minutes of ENL standalone, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 180 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area). Low Intermediates/Emerging will receive 360 minutes of ENL per week (this consists of 90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area.) Intermediate/Transitioning willl receive 180 ENL minutes per week (this consists of 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area). Advanced/Expanding will receive 180 minutes of ENL per week (this consists of 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area.) Proficient/Commanding or students who are former ELL's will receive 90 minutes of ENL each week (this consists of 90 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area.) We have a series of delivery models to ensure that each student receives these mandated ESL and ELA minutes through discrete ESL classes as well as many classes taught by dual certified ESL/content area teachers. (ie: teachers who have dual certification in both ESL and a content area such as ESL/English, ESL/Social Studies and ESL/Biology certification.) Each instructional team includes at least two teacher who is licensed in ESL; in addition, all of our content area teachers are trained in language development and ESL methodologies and encouraged to pursue ESL certification. The school schedule and teacher programming ensure that all entitled ESL students receive the mandated number of minutes required according to CR Part 3  154. In addition to our regular content curriculum all ELL students are given extra ESL instruction in order to meet the number of minutes they require of ESL instruction each week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 3. Delivery of content material: At International High School our ESL teachers as well as all of our content area teachers provide content area support for ELL's through all content area classes. All students take math, science, social studies, and ESL and/or English every year. Although the language that teachers use from the front of the room is English, the language of instruction for specific projects and on any specific day is collaboratively determined – students use both English and their native languages to explore content and the locus of control for language is student-driven by the content and the students’ needs. Instruction is not unidirectional from teacher to student in our school. Students work in groups to complete collaborative tasks that both develop language and content knowledge. The instructional method used in delivering content area instruction is through the Internationals Network for Public Schools (INPS) Approach. This research-based instructional approach utilizes five strategies which foster language deveopment and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. They consist of heterogeneity and collaboration, experiential and project based learning, language and content integration, localized autonomy and responsibility and one learning model for all. A variety of instructional materials are used such as: laptops, library books, work books, dictionaries and teacher-generated activities. The educational principles of The Internationals HS at LaGuardia include an approach to curriculum that is student-centered, inquiry- driven, and project-based, revolving around themes and essential questions that provide a balance between content and English language skill building. Small, heterogeneous grouping within classes provides a powerful vehicle for English acquisition, wherein students from diverse language backgrounds use English to accomplish a given task, drawing on their native language as a resource. Language and literacy are developed through interaction with peers and teachers about meaningful ideas in authentic context. In order to provide our students with native language support in the content area we provide our students with bilingual dictionaries, peer group support, native language texts, as well as bilingual paraprofessionals to assist in the classroom. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Native language screeners are used when possible to evaluate ELLs in their native languages. With over nearly 40 different languages spoken by our student population, many of our ELLs speak languages for which screeners are not available, so we rely on student peers, parents and community partners to provide feedback on native language projects. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) Instructional plan for SIFE Students: All students who are identified as SIFE students (Students with Interrupted/Inconsistant Formal Education) are immediately placed in our SIFE program where they receive additional support in English literacy until a level of proficiency is achieved as determined by the SIFE coordinator and the SIFE leadership team along with the student’s individual teachers and guidance counselors. The common denominator among these students is a weakness or inability to read or write in their native language. Teachers and guidance counselors identify students who meet this profile through an examination of report cards, educational history and student work, student parent interviews and teachers referrals. Once students are identified to enter the SIFE program, our challenge is to find ways to teach students to read and write in English and acquire content knowledge when they have limited, if any, literacy skills in any language and may also have serious affective issues as well. In order to service students who are struggling, each team has provided extra services: including one-on-one work with a paraprofessional, small group instruction, and after school tutoring. School-wide, a Saturday enrichment program has been established, and changes in student programs (such as an extra language arts period) have been made. Over the past four years with the money’s from the SIFE grant literacy program an accelerated literacy program was implemented school-wide 4  and met with enthusiasm by staff, students and parents. Our SIFE model requires three important features: • An intensive Language Arts period is held during the regular core daily program to accelerate learning taught by a specially trained literacy ESL licensed teacher in small group settings of five to ten students in which instruction is guided by individual students’ needs. This class is focused on reading comprehension, reading fluency and vocabulary development based on high interest topics drawn from the social studies curriculum. • Scaffolding students’ work in regular heterogeneous classes for most of the school day by developing collaboration between the SIFE teacher and content area teachers to generalize and practice newly learned skills and strategies across a variety of settings. A team teaching approach would be used in which the SIFE teacher plans with the content areas teacher, works with SIFE students in the classroom daily to implement strategies, and also meets after class sessions with the content area teacher to discuss students’ work and review lessons and activities. • All SIFE students are expected to attend extra after school home work sessions and are also enrolled in our weekly Saturday Explorers club which serves to enhance their literacy skills through exploration of NYC and its environment. b) Instructional Plan for Newcomer ELL Students: Newcomers to the school, along with their parents, meet initially with a guidance counselor who assesses their needs and academic development during intake. All new students and their parents receive an orientation developed by the guidance staff along with the parent coordinator. All students new to the United States and to NYC are given the NYSITELL exam which assesses the students English language abilities. For students transferring in from NYC schools, test results are reviewed and students are then matched with teams of teachers who it is felt would best meet the needs of the specific student. Students are placed in appropriate classes according to their specific needs. The teachers meet in team to discuss the specific needs of all new students. A plan is formulated to best meet the needs of each particular student. c) Instructional Plan for Developing ELL's: The plan for developing ELLs receiving service for 4-6 years consists of ongoing support and mentoring. ELLs with 4-6 years of service are placed in appropriate classes to best meet their needs and continue their English language development. Their teachers meet regularly in teams to discuss the needs fo the specific students. A plan is formulated and updated regularly to meet the needs of each student. ELLs who are receiving service for 4-6 years receive a full program and receive all the same support structures as the rest of our ELL poplulations. Struggling ELLs who are receiving 4-6 years of service are encouraged and often mandated to avail themselves of all the extra support opportunities provided to all the students at large. This help takes the form of one-on-one mentoring, small group instruction, after school homework help, the Saturday literacy program as well as a variety of other activities. ELLs with 4-6 years of service are encouraged to try to take some college classes to help them to begin the transition towards college life. These ELLs with 4-6 years who meet regularly with their guidance counselor and teachers on their team to receive support and feedback to help assess in their language development. d) Instructional Plan for Long Term ELL's: The plan for long term ELLs consists of ongoing support and mentoring. Long term ELLs continue with a full program whether they are with us 5 or 6 years and retain all of the same support structures in place for the entire student population. Struggling long term ELLs are encouraged to take advantage of all extra help opportunities provided to the students at large. This extra help takes the form of one-on-one mentoring, small group instruction, after school homework help, writing center as well as a variety of other activities. Whenever possible, long-term ELLs are encouraged to begin taking college classes to help them to begin the transition towards college life. International High School long term ELLs regularly begin taking remedial college classes. All long term ELLs in college classes receive support from a high school teacher mentor. e) Instructional Plan for Former ELL's up to 2 years after exiting ELL status): As students reach proficiency and test out through the NYSESLAT assessment, they continue to receive a full program of ESL services to support and provide for their continued academic growth and development of English proficiency. Students receive higher levels of project opportunities and also have the opportunity to take college classes in some of their academic areas. Our school offers these students the opportunity to receive college credits through Kingsborough Community College, College Now program. Students who are determined to have reached proficiency continue to receive support from their 5  teachers as needed. Former ELLs continue to receive the mandated testing accommodations after they they have tested out on the NYSESLAT exam. All former ELLs in college classes receive support from a high school teacher mentor. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies and grade level materials used to provide ELL-SWDs access to academic areas and accelerate English language development: The guidance counselor, Assistant Principal and Special Education teacher review all IEP’s for ELL-SWD’s to ensure that all IEP mandates are being met and to ensure that the ELL-SWD student receives the appropriate program in the least restrictive environment. After reviewing the mandates of the IEP, the full team of teachers meet with the Special Education teacher to discuss specific instructional strategies that would prove valuable to the growth of the ELL-SWD student and follow the mandates of the IEP. The team along with the guidance counselor, Assistant Principal and Special Education teacher ensure that all of the mandates in the IEP are carried out. If additional support is needed the student is provided with additional support services as per the IEP. The ELL-SWD students who may have learning needs undiagnosed in their home country, have been here a short time and are only beginning to learn English, and/or have experienced serious disruptions and inadequacies in their earlier academic preparation are addressed by creating instructional opportunities geared to their needs. Students with Individualized Education Plans (IEP's) receive full support from the instructional teams to which they belong. Those students are included in mainstream classes, and receive additional services in language, counseling, and adaptive physical education. In biweekly meetings, the teachers of our instructional teams meet to review the progress of these and other students. Teams of teachers along with the guidance counselors meet regularly throughout the semester to review the progress of each student in accordance with their specific IEP. Some of the specific instructional strategies for ELLs depending on the requirements of their specific IEP’s include: Teachers, guidance counselors and special education teacher meet regularly to discuss the individual needs of the ELL-SWD student. Once students have been identified as ELL-SWD and a program has been established following the mandates of their IEP, the challenge is to find ways to teach the student the skills they require while also teaching the student to read, write and speak English and acquire content knowledge when they may have limited, if any academic skills, have specific disabilities as described in their IEP and may have serious affective issues as well. In order to service the ELL-SWD student in the least restrictive environment, students are mainstreamed into the regular academic class and each team provides extra services: including one-on-one work with a paraprofessional, small group instruction and after school tutoring. School-wide, a Saturday enrichment program has been established, and changes in student programs are made to allow the student time to meet with the necessary special service provider depending on the students specific needs. Other strateiges include scaffolding students’ work in the regular heterogeneous classes for most of the school day by developing collaboration between the special education teacher or service provider and the content area teachers. A team teaching approach would be used in which the special education teacher plans with the content area teachers to map out strategies an best practices and to access the students strengths and area which still need improvement. If necessary, ELL-SWD students are expected to attend extra after school home work sessions and are also enrolled in our weekly Saturday Explorers Literacy Program which services to enhance their literacy skills through exploration of NYC and its environment. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The International HS at Lafayette uses a variety of curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWD’s to attain their IEP goals within the least restrictive environment. Once students are identified ELL-SWD’s our challenge is to find ways to teach students according to the mandates of their IEP’s in the least restrictive setting. The team would meet with our Special Education teacher or service provider depending on the needs of that students particular IEP in order to determine the best instructional strategies to meet the needs to that student according to their IEP. In order to service students who are struggling, each team has provided extra services: including one-on-one work with a paraprofessional, small group instruction, and after school tutoring. School-wide, a Saturday enrichment program has been established, and changes in student programs (such as an extra language arts period) have been made, as well as elective periods and push-in support models. By adapting curriculum to enable those students to succeed, by expanding the time 6  available to team members to work with them individually, and by using the resources of paraprofessionals, student teachers, they are supported in meeting the graduation certification requirements. Our plan maintains that our future students with IEP’s will receive additional academic assistance in accordance with the particular needs of their individualized IEP’s. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All of our targeted intervention program are geared towards supporting all of our ELL subgroups; teachers running these programs implement the “Internationals Approach” in all of them: • Saturday Literacy Program (Explorer’s Club/ENL)—classes will meet a total of 30 sessions beginning in September, through mid June, from 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 P.M. 12-15 students will be served. Group size will be maintained at 6-7 students per teacher. This class will be targeted to Entering and Emerging level students only. Certified ESL teachers along with content area teachers will provide supplemental instruction in alignment with the New York City and New York State content and performance standards. Instruction will focus on developing skills in both English and Math Literacy using English acquisition through new vocabulary learning, oral practice through discussions, learning map skills (with NYC land mark and subway system), and cultural/historical exploration, and conduct interview, journal writing during and after the trip. These strategies will help students achieve higher scores on the NYSESLAT. Students create a brochure “Places to go in New York City” by the end of the year. For some of the sessions, students first meet a 9 a.m. to do classroom work and go off on trips visiting various museums and land marks in NYC. In addition to 2 teachers, instructional material, general classroom supply, and snacks will be purchased to support the Saturday Academy. • SIFE ENL Literacy class---specially addresses instruction in second language acquisition to improve literacy performance through new vocabulary learning, pronunciation, read-out loud, oral practice through conversation and discussion, and sentence structure. Two classes, each consisting of 10 students and meeting for 50 sessions in total, meet 4 times a week for 70 minutes each, from late September to early June. This class will target Entering and Emerging level students to help them improve on the NYSESLAT. Instructional material, general classroom supplies and snacks will be purchased to support this class. • SIFE Math Literacy class- specially addresses instruction in math literacy as well as in second language acquisition to improve math literacy performance through classroom discussion of mathematical concepts and word problems, vocabulary learning, pronunciation and oral practice through conversation and discussion. Two classes meeting 2 times a week for 60 minutes each, from late September to early June. This class will target Entering and Emerging level students to help them improve both on the Integrated Algebra Regents as well as the NYSESLAT. Instructional material, general classroom supplies and snacks will be purchased to support this class. • Student Community Involvement—ELL students have opportunities to do community service, research projects, and leadership training. This will culminate in their understanding of social issues that pertain to immigrant populations and thus enhance cultural awareness, social learning and a positive adjustment to American society. Over the past few years our students and staff have worked with a variety of outside community based organizations such as Global Humanitarian, NY Cares, i-Mentor, Arab American Association, French Heritage Program, Institute Cervantes and Liberty Partnership Program. Before/After School Tutoring-content area teachers in Social Studies, the students native language, English, Math and Science. Content area teachers in Social Studies, English, Math and Science provide support to students in all sub-groups in small group settings for one to two hours per week. Although all students may avail themselves of Before/After School tutoring the main ELL sub-gropus which are targeted are the SIFE studetns, Newcomers and ELL-SWD students. This not only includes students who are having difficulties with their class work but also provides assistance for students who are working on their 10th grade and Senior Graduation portfolio projects which include their social studies research paper, native language project, math project, science project, English literary essay, creative project as well as their mastery statement. These classes are taught by licensed pedagogues in the content area. Native language support is provided to students in all of the above mentioned intervention programs through the use of paraprofessionals, bilingual pedagogues, student peer and college mentors who share a common native language. In addition, bilingual dictionaires and multi-lingual computer software are utilized as well. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will build on our AP courses with Chinese language classes offered as well as Spanish/Math elective classes. 7  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NA 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Since approximately 88% of our students are ELLs, all school programs are “equal access.” In addition to the support and intervention services listed in the answer to question five of this section, we have the following after-school classes; while they may not all be “academic” in theme, all of them are designed to continue students’ language development through activities incorporating listening, speaking, reading, and writing of English: • SAT Math Prep • SAT Verbal Prep • iMentor • Student Government • French heritage Language Program • Institute Cervantes • Chorus • Visual Arts • Theater Arts • Piano • Korean Language classes • NY Cares Service Learning • Girls Write Now • Minds Matter • ACF Architecture Program • Trip of a Lifetime • Liberty Partnership All ELLs and former ELLs are invited to participate in the activities listed above at the time that they register for classes each semester. At registration they meet with their guidance counselor and teachers on their instructional team who describe the different activities. Students make a selection with the assistance of their teachers. Since 100% of our students are either ELLs or former ELLs the representation by ELLs in all of our school programs is substantial. In addition, we have an extensive College Now Program with Kingsborough Community College. Funding sources for after school and supplemental services offered to ELL’s in our school: Since our school funds are conceptually consolidated, the funding source for most of our after school targeted interventions listed in section 9 above and many of those listed in this section are covered by Title III funding as well as tax levy funding. The SIFE literacy and SIFE math classes which are held during the regular school day are currently funded exclusively with tax levy funds. The funding for the enrichment class is also covered by regular tax levy funding since it takes place during the regular school day. The funding for many of the activities listed in this section above are covered by the volunteer CBO organizations running the program. (ie: Liberty Partnership Program). 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. It is the philosophy of the school that classroom teachers are the most knowledgeable as to what instructional supplies will benefit the ELL students from all ELL sub-groups in their content area classes. Teachers work in teams to order classroom supplies for the ELL students they have in common. The teachers in consultation with the colleagues on their team as well as in consultation with the schools SIFE teacher and guidance counselors which classroom supplies would be most beneficial to the students in all of the schools sub-groups. Each teacher team selects the instructional material they feel will work best for the needs of their individual students. This helps to best meet the needs of all of our students in the individual sub-groups 8  within our school, Newcomers, SIFE, ELL’s 4-6 years, long term ELLs as well as former ELLs. Each team shares equally in the school’s NYSTL funds and chooses for itself how they wish to spend the schools their allotment of funds to best serve their individual students in all of their content area classes. Teachers and students in all ELL-subgroups have access to a huge array of novels, textbooks, non-fiction, bilingual dictionaries as well as native language books. All of the materials are available to all ELL sub-groups. Teachers are encouraged to attend ENL conferences to share information regarding various texts as well as other teaching aids and in addition our teachers work collaboratively to create their own instructional materials. Teachers utilize computer software, maps, the Internet as well as various other forms of technology which helps to maximize instruction in all content areas and within all sub-groups. Teachers in all content area have access to class sets of laptop computers with Internet access as well as two fully equipped computer labs. Teachers are having students use power point projectors to share the results of group projects or individual research. Smart carts with laptops are bringing technology into the classroom and extending the number of computers available to students outside the computer labs. Various nonprofit Internet organizations that provide feedback for students are helping students to revise and edit their work as well as suggesting additional resources. Additionally, teachers have made use of library book funds provided by the school to create mobile classroom libraries with books that are more accessible and more appealing to ELLs as well as all the other sub-groups of students within our school. The Teaching and Learning Committee has amassed a compendium of booklists, articles on literacy, and reading programs for reference by the instructional teams. All students including ELL students in all sub-groups, have access to a variety of technologies including a technology lab, wireless laptop computers. Students use various web based programs. Other resources available to all students and ELL sub-groups include native language texts and all students including all ELL sub-groups have access to our rather extensive native literature collection. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? All our students participate in our language development/ENL program. All of our classes use the native language to support learning. As described above, the locus of control over language use resides with our students and they use both English and their native languages to discover and develop content. Some projects every year are done in the native languages and in English and students are supported in developing their native languages to the greatest extent possible. Students are supported by peers, community partners, family members and/or school personnel. Native language skills are a valued aspect of all subject area classes. Students are required to complete a Native language project as one component of their graduation portfolio. This native language project is an informational, communicative or creative piece in a language other than English, along with a written explanation of the piece in English. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our instructional teams meet regularly to ensure that required services and supports correspond to ELLs' age and grade levels. All of the required services for high school-aged ELLs are available to students. We use a wide array of resources in our school including teacher-made materials, text books on a range of levels, trade books at many reading levels, and a large variety of non-text hands on materials. In addition, our school has wireless access in all classrooms and students use the Internet to access resources. If a teacher or instructional team is having problems locating published materials that are appropriate to the age of the ELLs then the instructional teams work together to create an adapt material which will be appropriate to the age level of the ELL. Our teachers understand the importance of utilizing materials and resources for the ELL’s appropriate age level in order to keep them engaged in learning. In addition, instructional teams are encouraged to attend professional development workshops throughout the year in order to help them better meet the needs of ELLs with age and grade level appropriate to the content of the classes. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We often coordinate summer programs in order to meet the needs of a wide range of ELLs. Additionally we coordinate intervisitations among teachers at the various schools to see best practices with ELLs and then implement that learning in their own classrooms. At monthly building council meetings, PD opportunities and other sharing of resources is coordinated. 9  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Prior to the school year, new ELL students are assigned to attend an introductory two day orientation session at the beginning of the school year. Students receive a tour of the school facilities and take part in ice breaker activities in an effort to become more comfortable with the high school environment. During that orientation new students are assessed as to their English language abilities. During this time, SIFE students are assessed. New students are assigned to heterogeneous teams (or clusters) with, as far as practicable, students who speak their native language. The new students are then paired with more experienced students who are responsible for escorting them to class and lunch, making sure they know how to get home, explaining school rules and customs, and acting as their translator and advocate in class. During this time a meeting is held with the parents of incoming ELLs to provide them with an understanding of the resources available to them at the school as well as within the community. Many similar activities take place when ELL students enroll throughout the school year. When a new student enrolls they meet with their guidance counselor and, along with the assistance of a translator, receive a one on one orientation to the school and the community. Just as with the students who began in September, students who enroll throughout the year are paired with more experienced students who are responsible for escorting them to class and lunch, making sure they know how to get home, explaining school rules and customs, and acting as their translator and advocate in class. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Our students can take electives that include a broad range of foreign language including, Spanish, Chinese, Japanese, Urdu, French and Korean. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: NA Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. Professional Development Plan: To achieve our instructional goals and implement our core beliefs an extensive structure of professional development has been developed. This professional development structure is on-going and fully integrated into our school structure. The principal repository of professional development has been the instructional teams in the school. Our entire school is divided into four team learning communities. The two Junior Institute 9th and 10th grade teams are each comprised of five teachers and approximately eighty students. The two senior institute 11th and 12th grade teams are comprised of 5 teachers and approximately 80 students. The teachers meet twice weekly to plan, develop and implement their curriculum and instruction. They develop and revise curriculum and model collaborative work for their students. Teachers also meet in cross-team groups to share student work and curriculum. They are also sharing strategies for maintaining project-based curriculum with meeting the demands of the Regents exams. For this year’s goals, the instructional teams met and completed the following school wide goals to help them address the Common Core Learning Standards. Category: Language and Content Integration: Goal 1: To create units that help students develop disciplinary and interdisciplinary academic language. 0  Category: Localized Autonomy and Responsibility: Goal #2: To develop students’ skills towards the higher levels of the New York State Performance Standards Consortium’s rubric in each discipline area and to work with students on their personal and academic strengths and weaknesses through projects. In order to assist our teachers of ELLs in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards we have planned to offer the multiple opportunities for professional development throughout the year. These professional development sessions are facilitated by fellow faculty members and school administrators. 1. Classroom Environment and Assessment: • Supporting SIFE and IEP students to access a rigorous curriculum • Building a supportive classroom environment from the start • NYS Performance Standards Consortium (NYSPSC) Portfolio Rubrics: Getting students to understand them and using them throughout the year as an assessment tool • Using baseline and benchmark assessments that are aligned to the Common Core 2. Alignment of Curriculum Meetings • Sharing unit maps and getting feedback on how to improve use of discipline specific academic language • Sharing baseline and benchmark assessments and getting feedback on how to develop students; skills towards higher levels of NYSPSC rubric in discipline area • Sharing syllabus and getting feedback on coherent curriculum throughout the year that builds on portfolio skills. 3. Curriculum Sharing: • All teachers bring portfolio project task and sample student work to share • Collect feedback on how well project allowed for students to reach higher levels of the NYSPSC rubric, and how project in the future can be improved to allow for students to reach high levels of the rubric. 3. Portfolio Project Inter-Rater Reliability: • Norming of portfolio rubrics for each project. 4. Nearly all staff is supported in attending national conferences where they focus on ELL support startegies across the disciplines. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 3. Support Provided to Staff to Assist ELL's Transitioning from middle school to high school: Professional development for all staff at The International High School at Lafayette is geared toward improving ELL academic achievement and language development; we build teacher capacity in these areas by a variety of means: a. Peer observations: teachers observe each other teach and write reflective letters pinpointing new strategies and techniques they have learned as a result. b. Conferences: faculty attend a variety of external conferences each year in order to keep abreast of new trends in ESL and their content areas. c. Q-TEL/OELL trainings: Our classroom teachers are encouraged to complete workshops with QTEL and other OELL offerings, which highlight best practices, like scaffolding and differentiation, for working with ELLs in the content areas. d. RFP PD Projects: small self-selected groups of teachers engage in action research projects throughout the year in order to learn more about specific ESL methodologies and strategies in order to enhance student achievement; all faculty present findings and recommendations to the rest of the staff so that all may benefit from the work of the rest. e. The Internationals' Network for Public Schools New Teacher Summer PD: This two day workshop introduces new International High School teachers to best practices and ESL methodologies. 1  f. Additionally we are in the Learning Partners Program since 2014 with a focus on Restorative Circles and growth mindset. g. Formative Assessment: our staff participates in ongoing professional development throughout the school year in developing and refining formative assessments for our school. 4. Minimum ELL Training for all staff: All of our teaching staff, which includes teachers who do not hold ESL or Bilingual licenses, are provided with a series of professional opportunities at International High School at Lafayette. The professional development program focuses on providing teachers with various instructional strategies for teaching English Language Learners. It also focuses on how to prepare ELLs to meet and exceed the NYC and NYS performance and learning Standards. These professional development sessions are facilitated by fellow faculty members and school administrators. 1. Two 2-hour session on supporting SIFE and IEP students to access a rigorous curriculum 2. One 1-hour session on Academic language for ELL students: • Introduction on language development and our students • Sharing unit maps on teams and coming up with interdisciplinary academic language that the team can focus on together with ELL students. 3. Two-2 hour sessions on Interdisciplinary scaffolding for ELLs • Various language and content integration workshops led by the Internationals Network for Public Schools 4. One 1-hour session using SMART board to build entry point for all ELL students 5. Two-2 hour session on scaffolding for ELLs • Strategies in the classroom integrating language and content • Strategies: -The Language Experience Approach -Vanishing Cloze -Joint Sentence Construction 5. One 1- hour session: Native language Use in the Classroom • How to incorporate native language and use it as a support for students in the classroom 6 One 1- hour session on effective scaffolding 7. Two 1 - hour sessions on cross-cultural understandings 8. Four 1 - hour training on restorative circles In addition, our staff participates in the Internationals Network for Public Schools Professional Development workshops: at three different points throughout the year our entire staff will meet with their peers from our sister International High Schools and attend workshops designed specifically for educators of recent immigrant ELL students. Topics will include scaffolding instruction, differentiation of instruction, ENL methodologies, SIFE students, meeting the affective needs of immigrant children, and language development. Other members of our non-teaching staff also attend staff development training. Our school secretaries and parent coordinator take part in many of the above mentioned staff development activities along with teachers. In addition, our secretaries attend an all day staff development for secretaries on Election day and our Parent Coordinator attends the mandatory two day Respect for all Anti-Harassment Initiative to prevent bullying and bias related incidents. Since all of our staff participates in the above-mentioned professional development opportunities throughout the school year, plus many more staff members avail themselves of the professional development opportunities listed in part 2 above, everyone receives many more hours than the current 50% mandated total for bi-lingual/ESL teachers. 2  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We will hold annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs at least one time during each school year, in addition to the four regular parent teacher conferences. At these meetings teachers will discuss the goals of the program, the language development process of the individual student, the language proficiency assessment resluts as well as the student's language development needs in all content areas. At this meeting we will have content area teachers, the student counselor, and a school staff member to translate as needed. If no staff member is able to translate than we will utilize the DOE Translation Unit to hold over the phone translations. The International High School at Lafayette has teachers working collaboratively on five interdisciplinary teams. Each of the teams meet together to discuss students' language development and content knowledge progress, language proficiency assessment results and language development needs during their weekly two hour meeting. Each interdisciplinary team has 40 minutes of their weekly team time to utilize for parent involvement time. This period of time which is within the teacher's contractual day is specifically set aside for meetings with parents of ELL's. Each team is assigned a paraprofessional or Community Associate in order to place phone calls to parents to schedule meetings. 2. In order to ensure that parent needs are accomodated we will utilzie our faculty members in order to make phone calls to parents to arrange individual meetings. When a faculty member is not available to translate we will utiize the DOE Translation Unit to ensure that all parents receive information about their individual parent meeting in their native langauge. Our five interdisciplinary teams will work with parents schedules to coordinate the best time for the individual parent meetings. Upon parents arrival to school, they will sign in on a computer in the amin office with translation help when needed. Teams will document which parents attend their meetings and will make follow up outreach to any parents who have not been able to attend a scheduled meeting 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The International High School at Lafayette provides all parents including ELL parents/guardians with the opportunity to attend a variety of literacy, math, and homework workshops, so that they can better assist in the education and learning or their children at home. Due to our SIFE grant, we were able to hold English class for parents that are wanting to learn English. Parent Workshops---A series of 2-hour workshops will be held on different topics of interest to our parents. Each year our PTA assembles of list of suggested topics and the school does its utmost to accommodate these workshop requests. This year some possible topics and projected dates based on parent feedback include: • One 2-hour session on how parents can help their children to succeed in high school and introducing parents to the International HS instructional model. (Planned for September 2015). • One 2-hour session on the College Application process and how to deal with financial aid forms and college financial aid bureaucracy. (Planned for October, 2015). One 1-hour sessions to: a) Title I Annual Parent Meeting; (Planned for November 2015). • Two 2-hour session on the communication and relationship between parents and their teens. (Planned: December, 2015) • One 2-hour session on support from CBO's for recently arrived families and students. (Planned: January, 2016) • One 2-hour sessions on how parents can use Jumprope as a tool to keep up with how their child is doing in school. (Planned for: February, 2016). One 2-hour session on careers and summer opportunities. (Planned for March, 2016) • One 2-hour session on how to support students with issues of cultural adjustment and second language learning. (Planned for April 2016). • One 2-hour session on awareness of gangs and how to keep your child safe and warning signs of bullying. (Planned for May, 2016). 3  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jon Harriman, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: International HS at Lafayette School DBN: 21K337 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jon Harriman Title Principal Kathlyn Clark Assistant Principal Carolina Bobe Parent Coordinator Rakibat Abiola ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ines Xicara Parent Matthew Hoffman Teacher/Subject Area Tracy Post Teixeira Teacher/Subject Area Amy Gallagher Coach Coach Tania Alvarez School Counselor Kathy Rehfield-Pelles Pati Ibarra Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Related-Service Prov Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 7/24/15 7/24/15 7/24/15 7/24/15 7/24/15 7/24/15 7/24/15 7/24/15 1/1/01 7/24/15 7/24/15 1/1/01 7/24/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 6 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: International HS at Superintendent: Kathy Pelles DBN: 21K337 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this Carlos Franco Community Coordinator conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data used to access our school’s written translation and oral interpretation needs include data found from a variety of sources. The parent surveys and parent selection forms gathered from student permanent records and from those filled out by parents when students entering the NYC schools for the first time. We also utilize information gathered from Part III of the Home Language Survey (HLIS), ATS reports, Student Emergency Contact cards, Language Allocation Policy, the School Parent Compact, and the School Parent Involvement Policy. The policy of International High School is to provide all parents with written translation and oral interpretations through all means available to us. 7  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Bengali Chinese Any Cantonese Georgian Haitian Creole Mandarin English Polish Romanian Russian Spanish Tigre Tadzhik Urdu Ukrainian Uzbek Vietnamese Wolof 3 49 8 117 0 4 16 0 30 1 1` 46 149 1 2 26 2 15 1 0 0.64 10.94 1.72 25.11 0 0.86 3.43 0 6.44 0.21 0.21 6.8 33.24 0.21 0.43 5.58 0.43 3.22 0.21 0 3 48 8 57 24 4 17 36 33 1 1 29 151 1 2 24 2 16 1 0 0.64 10.71 1.72 12.23 5.15 0.86 3.65 7.73 7.08 0.21 0.21 6.47 33.71 0.21 0.43 5.15 0.43 3.43 0.21 0 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None of these languages are greater than 10% (other than the languages listed among the standard languages for which translations are provided. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 8  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Intake forms, questionaires & new student/parent information Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. June through September NYC DOE's Translation Service as well as outside vendors for non-covered languages. Parent-teacher conference announcements Multiple mailings throughout year NYC DOE's Translation Service New York State Regents testing dates December and April Parent newsletter Quarterly Orientation letter to new students Early July and August March credit letter and summer dates March Notification letter for first day of school NYC DOE's Translation Service NYC DOE's Translation Service NYC DOE's Translation Service NYC DOE's Translation Service September and February NYC DOE's Translation Service Notification letter for new parent orientation 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conference September 27, 2018 Parent Teacher Conference November 30, 2018 interpretation service(s)? Utilizing staff as well as Language Line over-the-phone interpretation provided by the DOE. Utilizing staff as well as Language Line over-the-phone interpretation provided by the DOE. 9  Parent Teacher Conference March 7, 2019 Parent Teacher Conference May 9, 2019 Monthly Family Association Meetings Monthly Utilizing staff as well as Language Line over-the-phone interpretation provided by the DOE. Utilizing staff as well as Language Line over-the-phone interpretation provided by the DOE. Utilizing staff as well as Language Line over-the-phone interpretation provided by the DOE. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We will utilize the NYC Interpretation Phone service. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We will incorporate it into our staff handbook and also post in the main office the regulations. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) International High School takes the responsibility of providing each parent with written translation and oral interpretation services extremely seriously. Every effort is made to ensure that parents whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with written notification of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services in the appropriate covered receive those services as well as instructions on how to obtain such services. -When a parent enters the school they are greeted by a parent welcome poster conspicuously posted outside the main office. -When a parent enters the main office a language ID guide is clearly posted at the security desk as well as in the main office. -At the new parent orientation meetings in August and February parents are provided with the Parents' Guide to Language Access. Copes of the guide are also distributed to parents at the four parent conferences throughout the 0  school year. In addition, copies of the guide are posted in the main office where translations are made available as needed. -Notification to our parents is made in a variety of ways. Our parent coordinator provides monthly newsletters in all the covered languages as well as in a variety of primary languages providing notification of their rights. This information is also provided to parents at several points throughout the year. The Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselors hold an orientation for new parents twice a year in August and in February through the Parent Association which informs parents of their rights in terms of translation and interpretation services. Translators are provided at each of these meetings. The information is also provided to parents through our telephone messenger system which sends out the messages in a variety of languages. Parents are also informed of the translation and translation services at all four parent teacher conferences held in September, November, March and in May. • The information is to be posted in a conspicuous location near the primary entrance to the high school in the covered languages. This notification indicates that a copy of the written notification of the parent’s Bill of Rights regarding language assistance services and translation services are available from the Parent Coordinator in the main office, room 301. • International High School’s safety plan will contain procedures in order to ensure that parents in need of language assistance services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. • “Each school at which the parents of more than 10% of the children at such school speak a primary language that is neither English nor a covered language shall obtain from the Translation and interpretation Unit a translation into such language of the signage and forms required pursuant to this section and shall post and provide such forms in accordance with this section.” At International High School the only languages spoken by over 10% of the students are covered languages. (Spanish and Chinese). • International High School will provide information in each of the covered languages concerning the rights of parents to translation and interpretation services and how to access such services on its school website. Training will be provided for teachers and other staff members by the LAC, and the professional development session will cover over-the-phone with Language Line as well as an overview of other services and resources available. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In order to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services the school will assess the answers parents provide in the school survey about whether or not the school is communicating with the parent in their native language. Parents who attend monthly Family Association meeting will be asked to provide feedback on how well the school is providing parents with both written and oral translation services. In addition, whenever our parent coordinator communicates with parents she will request feedback on ways to improve communication and availability of translation services. Survey is available for families in their native language and if need be we will contract outside vendors for translation of languages outside of the nine languages that NYC DOE regularly provides for. 1 
