 75K371 School Name: P.S. 371 - LILLIAN L. RASHKIS Principal: JOAN ANTONELLI   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Lillian Rashkis High School 75K371 9-12 School Number (DBN): N/A 355 – 37 th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11232 718 788-7608 718 369-5548 Phone Number: Fax: Joan Antonelli jantone@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Joan Antonelli Timothy Ring TakeemaJohnson President Timothy Ring and Joan Antonelli N/A TaishaLewin JwanLyons N/A District Information Geographical District: 75 KetlerLouissaint Superintendent: 400 First Avenue, New York, NY 10010 Superintendent’s Office Address: klouissaint@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-802-1502 Phone Number: 212-802-1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Marie Callaghan KetlerLouissaint FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 400 First Avenue New York, NY 10010 mcallaghan4@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-802-1655 Phone Number: 212-802-1604 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Joan Antonelli Timothy Ring TakeemaJohnson Raymond Arroyo JwanLyons Maurice Zebede *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Grace Gonzalez Tina Marrero Joseph Williams Zachary Praskin Ryan Merkel Christina Louis Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ENL Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Social Worker Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to create rigorous Specially Designed Instruction (SDI) supported by flexible scheduling with full school community support. Our instructional focus is build a community of reflective learners that grow academically and professionally through self assessment and actionable feedback. We incorporate multi-tiered systems of support catered to the needs of the individual. We empower our students by providing access to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and Career Development and Occupational Studies (CDOS), enriched by real world experiences and opportunities, ensuring college and career readiness.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Lillian Rashkis High School (P371K) is a D75 high school program servicing students with special needs in grades 9-12. L.R.H.S. services students with a wide range of disabilities. Our students are classified with emotional disturbance, intellectual disabilities, school phobic and students on the spectrum. Our school includes three sites and several work sites. Our main campus supports students with emotional disabilities, intellectual disabilities & students on the spectrum. Our off site at Sunset Park High School supports students with intellectual disabilities and students on the spectrum. Our off site at Telecommunications High School supports our school-phobic students who take standardized assessments. We have self contained classes in all three sites (12:1:1, 6:1:1, 8:1:1) as well as inclusion in SPHS and Telecommunication HS. Our vision for Lillian Rashkis High School is a commitment to respect for all by creating a safe and nurturing environment with high expectations. Students will become productive and independent members of society able to think critically and advocate for themselves. The learning environment is customized and personalized to meet the needs of the individual. Students are provided with choices and opportunities that build upon their strengths. The instructional focus of Lillian Rashkis High School (L.R.H.S.) is to improve upon specific actionable feed back to our students as well as teach them how to self assess through reflection. We will use a variety of assessment tools that will drive rigorous specially designed instruction in support of our students and their various needs. Every unit of study will end with a culminating performance task where teachers will provide choices that align to the students learning style. Students will be included in the reflective process and have an opportunity to give teachers feedback about each unit. L.R.H.S. has created a continuum of study for our students that is designed to help them meet their college and career goals. Upon entering our program our students who are alternately assessed are placed in classes that strengthens their academic abilities and prepares them for pre-vocational opportunities. Students are placed in in-house as well as outside work sites as they move along the continuum. Our in-house work sites include our two cafe's, Lillian's Bistro and The Lunch Factory, Office Depot, Lillian's Gifts and our Go Green room. Students have opportunities to move through these work sites and be exposed to different types of work skills and find their niche. Our outside work sites include Fort Hamilton Army Base, Kings County Hospital as well as La Familia and Slimak (2 local restaurants). Our standardized students participate in a rigours regents bound curriculum that offers flexible scheduling and credit recovery opportunities to support students and their success. We also infuse CDOS skills in our classes and offer outside opportunities for our students to be able to earn their CDOS certificate with their high school diploma. Our counselors in partnership with our transition coordinator organize several trips to colleges and vocational training programs throughout the city exposing our students to the different programs and courses of study available to them upon graduation. For all students we have our after school program CHAMPS, which focuses primarily on basketball however, we plan to expand it this year to include a cooking club, a dance club and a book club. Our students really enjoy staying after school and through a special interest survey our students expressed that these were the other after-school activities they would like to see included. We have a school-wide PBIS (Positive Behavior Intervention System) that serves as a mutli-tiered system of support. The SCORE (Safety, Cooperation, On time, Respect & Effort) system is represented across the organization. Each component is tailored to the population it's supporting. We are working closely with the district and Professional Learning Collaborative (PLC ) in having staff trained in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Strategies (TCIS). We have successfully trained 89% of our staff in TCIS. Our data shows that our incidents have dramatically decreased since last year as a result of our school wide collaboration. We are currently training our staff in TCI for students with developmental disabilities and will continue that initiative into the 2018-19 school year. Our Regents scores in all content areas have increased over the past two years. Two years ago we implemented The Writing Revolution Program (Hochman method) has attributed to our growing success & adapting these strategies 0  supporting our standardized students in writing. All subject areas utilize these strategies as writing is a part of all disciplines. This exposure and consistency has had a positive effect on our students overall academic achievement. All teachers have been trained and are provided with continued support from our school based coach. For our students who are alternately assessed we have implemented First Author writing. We finished our 2nd First Author. Not only has credit accumulation increased but also the passing of Regents exams and improvement in SANDI/NYSAA scores. We will continue to implement 6 days of professional development to support our school wide initiatives in the areas of:  Continued support in Writing Revolution and First Author  Giving students specific and actionable feedback  Teaching students how to self assess and reflect  Designing questions that provoke critical thinking  Addressing all Components of the Danielson Framework for Teaching  Mindfulness   Working as a team Supporting instruction 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our two major work sites include Kings County hospital and Fort Hamilton Army base, we also have several community based work sites for our students based in the Sunset Park area that include culinary, retail, Home Health Care and clerical opportunities for our students working towards their CDOS certification. We have 25 self-contained classes, two (2) work site classes and three (3) inclusion classes in all. Our student population is approximately half alternate assessment and half standardized assessment. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Strengths: In the past year L.R.H.S. has built upon established professional learning communities (PLC) and expanded committees to analyze student work, behavior trends as well as infusing Career Development & Occupational Studies (CDOS) activities into our elective classes. The results of these PLC/committee meetings have been the following: Staff aggregating data from assessments to plan units of study.  Units of Study for the Alternate Assessment Curriculum with leveled activities and performance tasks.  Units of Study in all core content areas aligned to CCLS for standardized curriculum.   Professional learning committees creating culminating performance tasks and discuss the pacing and weekly objectives of their respective subject areas to ensure that the learning environment is customized according to the needs of the students. Students participate in real world experiences, embedding Career Development Occupation Standards (CDOS) across the curriculum in support of their post secondary outcomes.   Analyzing student work to inform next steps and create more student friendly rubrics.  Daily meetings with deans, counselors and administration to review incidents of the day and implement post crisis response plan in support of students and staff.  Teachers created a school wide expectation for Designing Coherent Instruction resulting in an agreed upon framework for lesson planning.  The school has implemented flexible scheduling, including test prep at the end of the school day to help students in standardized assessment meet course requirements for graduation & planning for Regents exams.  Teachers and related services created a criteria to move students to a least restrictive environment. 1   An additional weekly PLC (Pupil Personnel Team) comprised of teachers and related service providers meet to discuss students environmental needs and obstacles in an effort to increase academic success. Areas of Focus: Teachers will reflect on units of study and meet with their respective teams and make necessary adjustments. Teachers will use evidence to make those adjustments such as analyzing student work and student/teacher feedback. Pupil Personnel Team meetings will include the paraprofessionals as well as administration on a rotating basis. Professional development with focus on improving questioning and discussion techniques that with support critical thinking skills and foster peer to peer discussion. Post crisis response meetings will focus on more proactive behavior management strategies and meet with consistency resulting in a decrease in incidents throughout he school day. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75K371 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 250 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 16 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 84.0% % Attendance Rate 83.2% % Reduced Lunch 11.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 28.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 10.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 71.4% 0.4% 96.8% 54.8% 5.6% 0.4% 4 28% 8.4 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our strength continues to be in increasing our Regents and Sandi scores. We analyze our data from assessments, item analysis, interventions and class work. By implementing writing programs we have increased student scores along with creating access to less restrictive programs. We had a quality review in the 2016-17 school year and although we scored in the proficient range in pedagogy we considered the feedback regarding the questioning techniques observed in our classrooms. Our questions can afford to be more rigorous so our students can make deeper connections and think more critically. In refining our units of study teacher teams will include suggested pre-planned higher order thinking questions for individual lessons. This past school year our scores in Advance has improved. The average cumulative score for Question & Discussion Techniques was a 2.86 which improved from 2.72 the previous school year. We scored a 2.84 in Engagement and an average of 2.79 in Designing Coherent Instruction. We will continue to analyze Advance Data and plan professional development activities that support each component. Our NYC School Survey came back with positive results. In Rigorous Instruction we scored a 3.15, for Collaborative Teachers 3.32, for Effective School Leaders 3.93, Strong Families ties 4.23 and for Trust 3.70. Our numbers have improved from the 2016-17 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all standardized assessment students who attend consistently (90%) will demonstrate proficiency in creating coherent and complex sentences to improve writing quality. This will be measured by a 2.5 % increase from fall baseline to spring using the rubric from Writing Revolutions. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All teachers will work on writing revolution strategies. Teacher teams will meet weekly in there respective disciplines working on tasks that incorporate Writing Revolution Strategies School based coaches will support teachers in designing tasks implementing writing revolution strategies. School administrators will evaluate samples of teachers lesson plans on a monthly basis to check for differentiated writing activities and evaluate the impact it has on student achievement. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept 2018- June 2019 All classroom teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 School based coaches and all teachers. Sept 2018 June 2019 Administrators 12:1:1 8:1:1 inclusion teacher 12:1:1 8:1:1 Inclusion 6:1:1 12:1:1 8:1:1 Inclusion When developing culminating performance tasks teachers will provide choice for each unit of study. 6:1:1 Sept 2018 School based coaches, teachers. 12:1:1 June 2019 School based coaches along with teachers will facilitate a professional development for paraprofessional on how to support writing strategies. 8:1:1 Inclusion 6:1:1 8:1:1 12:1:1 Inclusion Sept 2018- June 2019 Administrators teachers, paraprofessionals. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 5  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Workshops for parents will be scheduled monthly by the parent coordinator to inform parents on different topics and ways of support for their children outside of school. Parents will be offered workshops on the different writing strategies their children are learning so they can provide necessary support at home. Parents will be informed through the schools portal, as well as quarterly news letters that will help parents support discussions about the students learning at home. Progress reports are distributed between marking periods. All parents will be informed of students progress by conferences and reports sent home. School based coaches, teachers, parent coordinator and assistant principals will oversee parent involvement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School based coaches, district coaches and laptops. Per session activities, teachers will refine units of study and instructional guides to reflect Writing Revolution strategies and help students make real world connections. Parents will access to Think Wave portal to view assignments and expectations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 standardized students who attend consistently will have shown progress in writing in all content areas as measured by a 2% increase in overall writing performance using the Writing Revolution rubric. Students have been measured through the writing rubric Paragraph and Composition goals. Students have been assessed two times since the start of the school year(September, 2018). Assessment again will take place at the end of May, 2019. Students have shown improvement in many areas. For example 68% of students has shown improvement in giving details, converting sentences, producing a quick outline and creating a narrative/descriptive paragraph. Results from our January Regents improved from January & June, 2018.. We showed an increase in the actual scores of Regents exams. We are on target to meet this CEP goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) By February 2019, teams of teachers will score each topic for composition and paragraph goals in mastering skills through the Writing Revolution rubric. We will analyze ideas on improved writing for the 2nd half of the school year. Students will improve from emerging to developing to proficient and finally Independent. Thus far after reviewing the checklist students have shown improvement in several areas. Through teacher observation and class work students have improved in developing topic sentences, giving details and writing a conclusion. We will continue to work on these skills along with producing a quick outline, editing and revising. Results will show in the June Regents Scores (2019). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Since September 2017 we have placed students in a less restrictive setting. Some of our students has show potential to transition from 12:1:1 self contained class to an inclusion setting. However, we need to create a criteria with clear expectations necessary for students and families to have a better understanding of what the process is to move along the continuum. Our school work based options need to expand in and outside of the school setting. Last year we moved 6 students to LRE Vocational settings and 4 students moved along the continuum for LRE; however zero students moved from self contained to a general education setting. This year 2018-19 we have created more opportunities by soliciting additional work sites and providing more support for students and teachers to show an increase in movement to LRE both job training and academics. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase in moving students to a less restrictive environment relative to our 2017-18 school year. The data includes an increase in placement in an LRE class setting; and an increase in participation in community vocational opportunities as measured by STARS data reflecting a 5% increase by June 2019. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All elective classes will include Career Developmental Occupational Studies (CDOS) to ensure that student are earning their credential. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students Sept.2018 Administrators, teachers and CBO. School will solicit additional community placements giving students more opportunities to complete internship in order to prepare for post high school secondary placements. Students Self contained teachers along with Inclusion teachers will meet to create a criteria of clear expectations for students to move along the continuum. Criteria will be created for both academics and vocational opportunities. Students Sept. 2018 through June 2019 through June 2019 Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Administrators and teachers. Teachers, Paraprofessionals and counselors. Staff will meet with appropriate candidates regularly throughout the year to ensure they are meeting the criteria to be successful. Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be notified about expectations and progress of all students. Each quarter information will be communicated through conferences, notes, Job Developer and School Psychogist. Each student will be monitored and progress tracked. LRE will be addressed during parent teacher conferences along with IEP annual reviews. Progress reports and the criteria to move onto LRE will be shared with parents at the start of the school year. Progress reports will note movement towards LRE and or Vocational Opportunities. Our Transition Coordinator, counselors, administration and teachers will oversee this process. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session monies for teachers to begin after school tutoring for targeted students to move to Less Restrictive Environment. Purchasing vocational resources/materials for in house work sites. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 8  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 3% movement of students moving along the continuum and community based work sites as measured by STARs data. As of February, 2019 we have moved nine (9) students along the continuum to a less restrictive setting by providing access for all. Twenty nine (29) students have moved either to full or part time work sites/vocational setting in and out of school setting. Job Developer, Timothy Ring, has solicited additional work sites for our students. Some examples are students working locally in cafe's/restaurants, For Donor's Choose, Brooklyn Public Library, Senior center, Custodial and clerical @ P371K. This year we have been very successful in placing students to vocational settings. We are on track to exceed this goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher-made progress monitoring checklist, STARS Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school had a quality review in 2016-17 and a Principal's Performance Observation review in 2017-18. Both reports reflected a Developing score in Teacher Pedagogy. Many classrooms were observed during this practice. We have addressed all ADVANCE component in Professional Development however we need to improve upon 1E Designing Coherent Instruction.  We will first participate in Learning Partners doing inter visitations with other District 75 High Schools  We will develop a deeper understanding of designing assessments that include more real life connections and    increased rigor to promote critical thinking. Staff will create rubrics that are aligned with the schools curricula that offer a clear picture of student mastery and next steps. Staff will provide actionable and meaningful feedback through conducting inter visitations with one another to further their learning. Improving upon the consistency in rigorous activity and share best practice on writing differentiated lesson plans to support all the needs of the students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teams of teachers will participate in collaborative learning as evidence by 90% of teachers engaged in peer inter-visitations and debrief sessions with colleagues/administrators from P371K as measured by an increase in scores of targeted components of the Advance Overall scoring measured by MOTP June 2019. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School based coaches and administrators will organize inter visitation schedules according need. Data will be analyzed after 1st observation from Advance and skills will be targeted. Teachers will visit colleagues who have scored well in specific components of Advance. Parents will be invited to celebrate student work and attend literacy fair along with programs used @ P371K. Parents All staff Sept Administrators, school based coach 2018 through June 2019 Sept.2018 and ongoing School based coaches will support teachers, individually and in teams providing professional development as needed and as recommended by administration. Coaches will develop protocols for teachers to analyze lesson planning, teacher practice and student outcomes. The school will work with external coaches to support staff with specific and actionable feedback that furthers teacher learning. Teachers will view videos of lessons connected to each domain and evaluate. Teacher will then norm and share results. All staff Sept 2018 through June 2019 All staff Sept 2018 through June 2019 All staff Sept Assessment data will be analyzed at the end of each unit of study for progress monitoring. Staff will address individual needs of students to improve scores in all subject areas. Parents will be informed of student progress through our online portal Think wave, Progress reports and final marking report 2018 through June 2019 Parents Sept 2018 to June 2019 Administrator, teachers and related service providers, parent coordinator Administrators and school based coaches & teachers Administration, teachers, District Coaches Administrators, coaches and teachers 1  cards. Parents will have access to grades, completion of assignments, transcript information, attendance and class work. Administrators, teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Workshops for parents will be scheduled monthly by the parent coordinator to inform parents on their child's progress. Key personnel is our Parent Coordinator along with the administrative team. Information will be disseminated to parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session activities, Professional development in ADVANCE components. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019 administrators will review teachers scores in the ADVANCE program, evaluate next steps and plan for additional support/ professional development where needed in the Measure of Teacher Practice. As of February 2019 a select group of teachers have made marked improvement in Designing Coherent Instruction along with Questioning and Discussion as a result of inter visitations scheduled with their colleagues. We are on target to meet this goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ADVANCE scoring and student outcomes (credit accumulation, SANDI scoring, FAST scoring & REGENTS. Percentage of students moving to Less Restrictive Environment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In reviewing the 2017 NYC school survey, the percentage that was lowest was: 64% of teachers reported that they have a moderate to great deal of influence over school policy in the area of selecting instructional materials used in classrooms. From the 2018 NYC School Survey we only increased that score by a few points therefore our focus is to support all staff during all Professional Learning Communities. Our strength is how the administrative team distributes leadership across different initiatives in the organization such as having lead teachers and paraprofessionals facilitate professional learning communities, that not only impact student learning, but social emotional growth. The teacher practice from the Danielson Framework for Teaching by providing specific feedback that furthers learning. Our priority need will be focusing on improved scores in Professional Responsibilities from Advance and improving our percentage of teacher satisfaction in the NYC school survey. Our teachers improved in Designing Coherent Instruction from the previous school year 13% in the Effective rating. We have created and leveled our lesson plans, analyzing data from Sandi assessments and from skills item analysis on Regents exams. We have surveyed teachers and empowered each to develop choices for culminating performance tasks. Our lessons reflect mini lessons and are connected to the workshop model. We need to continue to improve on collaboration and empowering staff. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will be more actively involved in the ongoing development of teachers by attending at least one Professional Learning Community per week and see all the different PLC's at least once a month which will result in the 3% increase in the teacher satisfaction on the NYC School survey. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administrators will attend academic, Pupil Personnel Teams and various committee meetings to support the school community in their progress. Targeted staff Administrator will collect and review meeting minutes for all of the teacher team and committee meetings. A review of assessment data, report cards, passing of regents exams and credit accumulation will be analyzed. Targeted staff Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Administration & teachers and coaches Administration & teachers and coaches Lead teachers will meet with administrators monthly during cabinet meetings to review student work, behavior plans and any other items they need additional support with. Targeted staff Sept. 2018to June 2019 Administration & teachers and coaches Lead teachers will attend specific cabinet meetings to discuss and be an integral part of the decision making in areas of success and improvement as they pertain to various school wide initiatives. Targeted staff Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Administration & teachers and coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through parent teacher conferences and other regular parent communications the school will be sharing topics in curricula and the point people in the areas of this curricula will be available to parents for questions and or support for the students in the home. Parents will have full understanding of our Units of Study tailored to meet the needs of their children. They will also be apprised of their child's progress from IEP goals and assessment data. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 4  Flexible scheduling for lead teachers assigned to Professional Learning Communities. Per session activities for refinement or implementation of curriculum. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 school leaders will survey the school community to assess if they are receiving enough support regarding teacher team/committee meetings from administration. School leaders have consistently attended all PLC meeting beyond once a month. This will be reflected in the upcoming NYC School Survey in May, 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Survey results, teacher effectiveness in using curriculum as evidenced by Advance specifically in the areas of Demonstrating Knowledge of Content and Pedagogy and Designing Coherent Instruction.. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. There is a need to get more parents involved in school functions/meetings/student celebrations. As a result of our NYC school survey our lowest percentage in Parent Involvement states: 85% of parents/guardians responded that, since the beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.) In addition to conferences and celebrating student work, our parent coordinator has surveyed our parents to meet their needs and successfully planned specific workshops according to the results of the survey. There has been a decrease in our behavioral data as a result of parent workshops that support parents in behavioral techniques that are used in school and can be used at home. We have shown an increase in students mastering their goals on their IEP due to parents participating in a workshop defining the function of the IEP as well as reviewing the NYS requirements for graduation. Better communication is needed to support all parents. After analyzing our survey sent to parents, it warranted additional pathways of communication. Some parents preferred a paper newsletter and others an App they could check on their Smart Phone. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will be an increase in communication with parents as measure by a 5% increase in parents participating in school functions from creating additional pathways of communication through Think wave portal, Newsletter and P371K Lillian Rashkis App. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parent Coordinator will ask parents/guardians what method of communication they prefer, for example a paper newsletter or a notification on their Smart Phone. Assistant Principal and Parent Coordinator will conduct a workshop teaching parents how to use the APP and the Think wave parent portal. Advance notice on all school-wide events will be disseminated via monthly newsletter and on the App. Inviting parents in for celebrations of students work throughout the school year. At the end of the 1st term in January 2019 mid year data will be reviewed. Parents will continue to be informed by portal, newsletters and phones calls of events in our organization. Attendance will be taken at every function. Parents who are unable to attend will be informed of additional events by our District. Appoint targeted staff to update and oversee the information shared with parents/families. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents/ families/ Sept 2018 to June 2019 Parent Coordinator, counselors, job developer. students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 School administration Sept. 2018 to June 2019 School-based coaches, teachers, parent coordinator. School administration, school based coach, teachers, parent coordinator. Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Teachers, parent coordinator. Parents Students Families Staff Parents/ families/ students If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 7  Think wave, purchasing of the App.. per session for targeted staff. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 40% of families will have attended school wide events and/or accessed the parent portal of Think Wave, Lillian Rashkis app. or obtain information from our newsletter. This will be measured by attendance at each school wide event. Since the start of the school year our parent participation has remained approximately the same since the prior school year. We have provided additional Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance at School functions. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Teacher assessment Mathematics Teacher made, Scantron/ assessment math assess/Algebra skills quiz Teacher assessment Science Social Studies Teacher assessment At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Student choice, Community Based organizations, Behavior Management Program. Mental Health support outside school. Other Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Writing skills, reading skills (Writing Revolutions) test prep, evidence based claims, using graphic organizers, thinking maps, credit recovery ERSB(Early Reading Skills Builder), SMILE Math skills, pre-algebra, use of manipulatives, test prep Test prep/hands on activities/lab requirements Test prep, DBQ, (Document Based Questions) essay writing, using graphic organizers, thinking maps Fitness room, cardiovascular and aerobic program, computer clubs. Student council participation, after Small group 1:1 Infused throughout the school day Small group 1:1 Infused throughout the school day Small group 1:1 Infused throughout the school day Small group 1:1 Infused throughout the school day Small group 1:1 8:00AM – 8:50AM daily 2:50pm to 4:50pm for after 9  school CHAMPS program. programs for students including COOP tech, Vesid. Fortune Society and Opportunities for a Better Tomorrow schoolCHAMPS beginning Oct, 2018. 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 7 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 3  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 4  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  5   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 371, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students N/A Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership 7  Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 8  ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 371, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; 9  ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; 0  ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 1  ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name Lillian L. Rashkis High School Borough Brooklyn School Number 371 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Joan Antonelli Coach Riham Barghouti ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Natalia Taryguina; Zack Praski Teacher/Subject Area Ms.Venturina/classroom teacher Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Assistant Principal Diane Zinn Coach Shakir Lavergne School Counselor Loredana Zito Parent Lilias Taroc Parent Coordinator Cindy Margul Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics 3  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 243 Total number of ELLs 28 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 11.52% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses Scantron to guide instructional planning for standardized assessment students. It is an online dynamic assessment tool that the students take twice a year. It offers teachers differentiated lesson plan ideas for individual students. Our alternate assessment students use ABLE, NYSAA, and SANDI, which measure early literacy skills of our students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our teachers use the data they obtain from the above-mentioned assessment tools to differentiate their instruction in order to meet the unique needs of our ELL students. 4  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? When evaluating the success of our program for ELL students, we look at their growth over time on the NYSESLAT, teacher-made tests, overall student performance in their class work, report cards and credit accumulation for the standardized assessment students. We also collect work for student portfolios and keep data collection sheets. We observe to see what else can be done to further improve our ENL program and assist out ELL students to fully participate in daily instructional activities. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school is a high school and does not use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention framework for grades K through 5. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Currently, we cannot report on data patterns revealed by performance levels on the NYSITELL, as all of our students have previously entered the DOE system; upon identifying new entrants, we would administer the NYSITELL - hard copies of which we keep on hand in our school - and analyze the data patterns revealed by the test. For the NYSESLAT, data patterns revealed are as follows: the majority of our students scored at the Entering and Emerging levels in Reading and Writing. We have 3 students at the Transition level, and 1 student at the Expanding level, most of whom are in grades 9 and 10. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our school delivers instruction for ELLs via stand-alone and integrated ENL instruction in ungraded heterogeneous groups. This organizational model serves to provide CR Part 154 mandates of ENL instruction based on students' proficiency levels. In high school, for entering and emerging students 540 minutes are delivered as follows: 180 minutes of stand-alone and 180 minutes of integrated ENL instruction must be delivered. For the remaining 180 minutes (180x3=540), there is a choice (for stand-alone or integrated). For students at the transitioning level, students receive 360 minutes of either stand-alone ENL or integrated ENL/content area instruction. At the expanding level, students receive 180 minutes in ENL/ELA or other content area instruction. Lastly, at the commanding level, students receive 180 minutes per week of integrated ENL in ELA/content area instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. Our school currently features a freestanding ENL program. c. DL program. If applicable. Our school currently features a freestanding ENL program. 5  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The organization of our staff ensures that the mandated number of isntructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels. We create teachers' schedules in such a way that our ELL students receive ENL services daily. Those ELL students whose IEPs recommend bilingual instruction receive support from alternate placement paraprofessionals who speak English and students' home languages. There is close collaboration among classroom teachers, ENL teachers, and paraprofessionals in order to support our ELLs. All of our classes are self-contained special education classes of 12:1:1, 8:1:1, and 6:1:1 ratios; during stand-alone ENL instruction, we keep to these mandated ratios. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our standardized assessment students are in graded classes, and our alternate assessment students are in ungraded classes. Students in both standardized and alternate assessment programs take core content area classes. The standardized assessment students take classes under the NYS Part 100 guidelines and are required to earn their credits to receive an academic diploma. The alternate assessment students are also taking core content coursework and are required to meet their IEP goals in the content areas to receive their IEP diplomas. The ENL teachers collaborate with classroom teachers to discuss instructional approaches and methods in order to make content comprehensible and foster the language development of all ELLs, and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teachers reinforce classroom activities, which are aligned with CCLS, in content areas by fostering high-level thinking in ELA, math, science, and social studies teaching analysis, synthesis and evaluation of content information according to DOK, as well as ENL methodologies (i.e., TPR, Natural Approach, Cooperative Learning, Language Experience Approach, etc.) 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Our school currently features a Freestanding ENL program. ELL students are evaluated in their native languages through the use of our alternate placement paraprofessionals and bilingual psychologists. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We currently have three SIFE students. The SIFE students are provided with the following activities: supportive environment created by bilingual staff from the students' home countries (with the assistance of alternate placement paraprofessionals), SIFE students and parents are provided with access to support services (in the families' native languages) provided by counselors, tutors, mentors, and parent coordinator. A buddy system is in place in each classroom. Administrators, counselors, and classroom teachers work together to ensure that the students and their families have the necessary information needed to provide school supplies, documentation for meal programs and other requisites for assimilation. Newcomers, students with less than three years of ENL services, are provided with increased sheltered strategies (use of visuals, collaborative learning activities and demonstrations). Language is adapted and additional contextual support is provided to help our students understand the content presented. We utilize age/grade/level-appropriate books. Explicit instruction in reading in an age-appropriate manner is used (phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary, comprehension). Students with 4-6 years of services are taught metalinguistic strategies that they can use in the future, such as using dictionaries, taking notes, highlighting, and using graphic organizers. Their prior knowledge is activated through questioning techniques and encouraging students to make text-to-text, text-to-world, and text-to-self connections. This will enable the students to relate what they have previously learned in their countries to what they are currently being taught. Our students are taught metacognitive strategies and skills that teach independence. Students use computer technology tools to experience and develop all four modalities of their language skills. They work collaboratively with their classmates to help 6  them progress to the next level of learning. They are involved in all extended day programs including Title III, CHAMPS, AIS, peer tutoring and counseling to improve test preparation and literacy skills. We have eighteen long-term ELL students at this time. We offer long-term ELLs extra services, such as AIS, peer tutoring, after school programs, field trips, summer school, and counseling. The students receive extensive support to ensure that strategies practiced in ENL classrooms transfer to the grade-level content classroom. For at least two years following the school year in which a student is exited from ELL status, former ELLs receive at least one half of one unit of study of English as a new language (90 minutes per week). The type of instruction (language-sensitive instruction) has been utilized where content teachers are sensitive to both the language needs of the student and the language demands of the content subject. Additionally, the double ENL block with differentiated instruction provides extra support for long-term ELLs. It is important to choose high-priority content studied in depth and relat it to students' prior knowledge. In case we have students who have scored out of ENL instruction (NYSESLAT and regents scores) we will continue to provide them with language and instructional support for two more years. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our school incorporates and follows Unique Learning System - the dynamic, standards-based units of study specifically designed for students with special needs. Our teachers differentiate and implement Unique materials into classroom learning activities. The lesson plans define three levels of differentiated tasks to accommodate the diversity of learners with disabilities to bridge between standards and the special education curriculum content for ELL-SWDs. Instructional targets are aligned to the Common Core Standards in ELA, math, science, and social studies. The ENL teachers and other teachers of ELL-SWDs also use instructional strategies and age/grade/level-appropriate materials that provide access to academic content and accelerate English language development: e.g., storytelling, Shared Book experience, cooperative learning, etc. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable diverse ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. We utilize meaningful and functional assessment instruments, such as SANDI and Scantron to consider the unique needs of our students with cognitive and physical disabilities. All activities are student centered and teacher friendly. They are aligned and connected to CCLS. They allow our teachers to identify student need areas and prioritize these need areas for the development of meaningful IEP goals and objectives connected to CCLS. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The targeted intervention program our school offers in ELA is Keystone Reading, which is a differentiated reading program designed for students that are at several different levels in reading. We have designed a Global Studies "Question of the Day" Bank that follows the pacing calendar and offers teachers test prep questions that can be given to the sudents on a daily basis and broken down and discussed in order to prepare them for their Regents and RCT exams. We use the NYS exams for our standardized assessment students to assist in determining which skills our students have and still need in order to be better prepared for HS math and ELA. These interventions are mainly offered in English, but the ENL teachers work in conjunction with the classroom teachers to offer support for the students in their native language. Our ELL students greatly benefit from these programs. Our alternate assessment students use Weekly Readers and Equals Math. For ELA, math, science, and social studies, our school incorporates and follows Unique Learning System - the dynamic, standards-based units of study specifically designed for students with special needs. Our teachers differentiate and implement Unique materials into classroom learning activities. The lesson plans define three levels of differentiated tasks to accommodate the diversity of learners with disabilities to bridge between standards and the special education curriculum content for ELL students with special needs. Instructional targets are aligned to the Common Core Standards in ELA, mathematics, science and social studies. The ENL teachers and other teachers of ELL-SWDs also use instructional strategies and age/grade/level-appropriate materials that provide access to academic content and accelerate English language development: e.g., storytelling, shared book experience, cooperative learning, etc. 7  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year, we do not plan to introduce any new programs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs/services for ELLs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. We make sure that our ELLs are invited, afforded, and have equal access to all school curricular and extracurricular programs including Title III (which focuses on improving language skills through cross-cultural learning activities with iPads and will be offered on Saturdays in the Spring), CHAMPS, AIS, etc. We make parents aware of the programs available to the students through phone calls and sending letters home in English and parents' home languages. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We use a variety of technology with our ELL population. This includes laptops, iPads, AAC devices, and a variety of software. In addition, to ensure that students meet the standards and pass required state and local assessments, ENL instruction follows CCLS, the New York State English as a New Language Standards, and incorporate ENL strategies, such as Total Physical Response (TPR), Language Experience, Whole Language, graphic organizers, and Cooperative Learning. Our ENL teachers use the following materials: "Longman Photo Dictionary of American English," "Get Ready to Write," "Exploring English," books on folktales, fiction and non-fiction in English and students' native languages. Content area textbooks are also used when working with standardized assessment students following the NYS Part 100 regulations. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We respect and honor our students' home languages; each classroom has room libraries, which have fiction, non-fiction, and poetry books in various languages. Home language support is also delivered through the services provided by our alternate placement paraprofessionals and our lirbaries that have a variety of books in other languages. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ENL and classroom teachers make sure that the required services support and resources correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels. While planning the instruction and creating materials, we utilize CCLS and the NYSAA ELA and math extensions to differentiate and modify our approaches in order to reach our ELL students at their individual levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We use a variety of technology with our ELL population. This includes laptops, iPads, AAC devices, and a variety of software. In addition, to ensure that students meet the standards and pass required state and local assessments, ENL instruction follows CCLS, the New York State English as a New Language Standards, and incorporate ENL strategies, such as Total Physical Response (TPR), Language Experience, Whole Language, graphic organizers, and Cooperative Learning. Our ENL teachers use the following materials: "Longman Photo Dictionary of American English," "Get Ready to Write," "Exploring English," books on folktales, fiction and non-fiction in English and students' native languages. Content area textbooks are also used when working with standardized assessment students following the NYS Part 100 regulations. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). If we have newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year, they are invited to participate in the District 75 Summer Chapter 683 Program and fully participate in all summer activities. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 8  Our school currently offers the Italian language elective to our standardized assessment students to help them meet the requirements of the HS diploma. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Our school currently features the ENL program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? During the school year, professional development is incorporated into workshops that will teach ENL strategies to the classroom teachers, school counselors, related service providers (OT/PT), and assistant principals, to support them in working with ELLs. The professional development is offered by the ENL teachers, Zack Praskin and Natalia Taryguina. Classroom teachers will also register for workshops that are offered through the Department of Education and through District 75. Classroom and cluster teachers work collaboratively with the ENL teachers to provide the best instruction for the students. Teachers also plan lessons that complement, instead of merely translating, the content instruction in the students' languages. Staff are supported in providing translation services to ELLs and their families for post-secondary school options in collaboration with our school's job developer and parent coordinator. This year, some of the topics included are Krashen's Affective Filter Hypothesis (November), the Language Experience Approach (December), scaffolding language for beginning (emerging) learners (March), Cooperative Learning (May). These professional development workshops will take place during our regularly scheduled school staff meetings. Paraprofessionals are to be included in the professional development. We will make every effort to sign up teachers for the district Jose P. training as it is offered for them to get the minimum of 10 hours of ELL training. Jose P. PD certificates are kept in the teachers' files. Our ENL teachers attend several professional development meetings offered by the District 75 Office of English Language Learners throughout the year. These include the New ELL Teacher Professional Learning Institute (for Zack Praskin only), Providing Instruction for ELLs on the Autism Spectrum, Promoting Culturally Responsive Behavior for ELLs with Disabilities, Teaching Core Vocabulary to ELLs with Severe Disabilities, and CR Part 154 Trainings. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Part of our professional development educating our staff on the Affective Filter Hypothesis focuses on transition stages and the likelihood that affective filters are raised when students enter a new environment. Additionally, school guidance counselors are informed on the differences between BICS and CALP (Basic Interpersonal Communicative Skills and Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency) to be aware of the unique needs of ELLs during the transition from middle school content area language to high school content area language. Our school provides professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of ELLs. The minimum of 15% of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 is dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. For our ENL teachers, 50% of the required professional development hours are dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and 9  integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. The ENL teachers maintain a special binder with all agendas, distributed material, and attendance records for the year's professional development work. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The parent coordinator at P371K, Cindy Margul, offers parents of ELLs ongoing information and updates in their home languages (Spanish, Chinese, Haitian Creole, etc.) and training on different aspects of their children's education, such as home activities to support learning, outside supports in their community, and parent interest needs surveys. Our school meets individually with the parents or guardians of English language learners at least once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings and other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians, to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This additional meeting should include school staff necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language development in all content areas in English and in the child’s home language in the case of students enrolled in a bilingual education program. These meetings are conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our school will periodically describe the ENL program to parents of ELLs at parent orientation meetings or letters sent home (in English and in families' home languages). Parents will be made aware of special programs through mailings and letters sent home with their children (translated into the preferred languages of parents/guardians). They are also informed of school events and happenings through our monthly parent newsletter. The ENL teacher running our Title III program, Zack Praskin, works with our parent coordinator, Cindy Margul, to ensure information about Title III is included in the above communications. Zack Praskin also calls parents of ELLs, and has alternate placement paraprofessionals make phone calls in parents' home languages, to get parents of ELLs involved in Title III. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Joan Antonelli, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P 371K, Lillian Rashkis HS School DBN: 75K371 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Joan Antonelli Title Principal Diane Zinn Assistant Principal Cindy Margul Parent Coordinator Natalia Taryguina/Zack Praskin ENL/Bilingual Teacher Lilias Taroc Parent Nina Venturina Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Shakir Lavergne Riham Barghouti Coach Coach Loredana Zito School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75k371 School Name: Lillian Rashkis High School Superintendent: KetlerLouissaint The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Cindy Margul Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At the beginning of every school year the Parent Coordinator sends around a form to classroom teachers inquiring about the home and preferred language of every single student enrolled in the school. She follows up until she has the information necessary for every single student. The PC reviews the data report generated by the Home Language Identification Survey (RPOB in ATS) monthly, as well as Student Emergency Contact cards and any surveys conducted by our school. We ensure that translation and interpretation services are available to parents as needed and that documents are provided to parents in their preferred language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 3  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Chinese Greek Haitian Creole Mandarin English Russian Spanish Ukrainian 16 1 2 0 293 2 44 1 4.46 0.28 0.56 0 81.62 0.56 12.26 0.28 11 1 2 5 294 2 43 1 3.06 0.28 0.56 1.39 81.89 0.56 11.98 0.28 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. We do not currently have any languages represented by 10% or more of our school's student population. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent handbooks with calendars of important dates/events. September/2017 Newsletters are distributed four times a year. October/2017, New York State testing dates and information surrounding the tests - twice a year. December/2017, March/2018, June/2018 December/2017, May/2017 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Documents will be translated into parents' preferred languages by the DOE Translation & Interpretation unit in advance. Documents are sent to parents via email and in the school's newsletter early in the school year. Documents will be translated into parents' preferred languages by the DOE Translation & Interpretation unit in advance. Documents are sent to parents via email and in the school's newsletter early in the school year. Documents will be translated into parents' preferred languages by the DOE Translation & Interpretation unit in advance. Documents are sent to parents via email and in the school's newsletter early in the school year. 4  Title III introduction and enrollment letters. January/2018 Documents will be translated into parents' preferred languages by the DOE Translation & Interpretation unit in advance. Documents are sent to parents via email and in the school's newsletter early in the school year. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide First-Term Orientation and Second-Term Orientation September/2017; January 2018 Parent-teacher conferences. November 2017; March 2018 PTA meetings. Every month of the school year Annual meeting with ELL parents & Title III parent workshop February 2018 interpretation service(s)? Staff members who speak the languages of parents/guardians of ELL students will attend to provide on-site interpretation. Staff members who speak the languages of parents/guardians of ELL students will attend to provide on-site interpretation. Staff members who speak the languages of parents/guardians of ELL students will attend to provide on-site interpretation. Staff members who speak the languages of parents/guardians of ELL students will attend to provide on-site interpretation. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, the school's communication strategy to reach limited-English-proficient families includes the following: 1. We utilize information from the students' blue cards in order to identify parents/guardians who should be reached in the event of an emergency and the languages they speak. This list of students, with the pertinent contact information, is held in a special folder in the main office. 2. We find a staff member who speaks that language, and notify them that they will be responsible for all communications to parents/guardians in the necessary language(s) in the event of an emergency. 3. If the language of a parent/guardian is not spoken by a staff member, then the DOE Translation & Interpretation unit will be contacted. 5  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 and resources available to meet compliance in two ways. First, all staff members are trained by the Parent Coordinator/LAC (Language Access Coordinator) at the beginning of each school year. Special Professional Development is given for in-person training prior to the date that students report to school. Second, school administration provides staff members with a packet containing all of the information regarding the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 and resources available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school has strategies in place to make sure to inform parents/guardians of ELL students of their right to receive information in their preferred language. The Parent Coordinator distributes a copy of the Parent's Bill of Rights and Responsibilities to all parents who are speakers of covered languages at the beginning of each school year (or within ten days of a child's registration at our school if that child registers after the beginning of the school year). Signs are posted in the main office in the covered languages to indicate available translation and interpretation services, and other signs are posted to invite parents/guardians to communicate with the Parent Coordinator. The signs ensure that no parent/guardian is denied access to the administration. In the event that a parent/guardian needs to communicate in a language that cannot be translated/interpreted at our school, the school contacts the Translation and Interpretation Unit for assistance. Whenever ten percent of our students have a home language that is not covered, we will arrange for translations of the Parents' Bill of Rights and Responsibilities, as well as other vital communications, by the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Twice a year, we distribute surveys parents/guardians of ELL students to gather feedback on the quality and availability of language services in our school. The first survey is distributed at the beginning of the school year to find out what parents/guardians would like to have available. The second survey is administered at the end of the year to find out if we met their needs, and how we can improve. We then sit down to analyze parents'/guardians' responses, which help us plan for future language services for parents/guardians accordingly. 6 
