 School Name: 22K381 I. S. 381 Principal: VICTORIA HIPPOLYTE AGARD   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: MS 381 332200010381 6, 7, 8 Grades Served: School Number (DBN): 22K381 School Address: 2500 Nostrand Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11210 718-338-1534 718-338-2794 Phone Number: Fax: Victoria Hippolyte-Agard VHippolyteAgard@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Victoria Hippolyte-Agard Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: JuliaLustig Candida Thomas-Hinds Susan Campbell Yvette Williamson n/a n/a Mr. Lenny Safer Geographical District: 22 District Information Ms. Julia Bove Superintendent: 5619 Flatlands Avenue, Brooklyn New York 11234 Superintendent’s Office Address: jbove@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-968-6115 Phone Number: 718-968-6252 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Team 6-District 22 MauricereDeGovia FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89 Street, Brooklyn New York 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4872 Phone Number: 718-759-4960 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Victoria Hippolyte-Agard Julia Lustig Candida Thomas-Hinds Michelle Turner, PC Yvette Williamson Not Applicable to Middle School Not Applicable to Middle School Patrick Lawler Paul D'Alessandro SusanCampbell Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Member/ Assistant Principal Member/Teacher Member/ SLTChairperson/Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Barbara Brizard Matina Perlegis Roxanne Charles Vanessa Bertrand Carolyn Jackson TaschimaLessey Daphne Mc Clendon Len Safer, Sports and Arts Foundation Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our School's Mission states "our entire school community works collaboratively to ensure that our students are provided with experiences and opportunities that will establish a strong foundation for high school and beyond. Academic instruction ensures that all students are equipped with the prerequisite skills to be college and career ready for the twenty-first century. As educators, we are committed to developing rigorous and challenging curriculum in all disciplines, opportunities for learning beyond the classroom, as well as cultivating a positive social and emotional mindset that is needed for students to take on their role as responsible and productive citizens. ”   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Intermediate School 381 is located in the Midwood section of Brooklyn, New York and is one of Community School District 22’s unzoned schools serving grades 6, 7 and 8. Co-located in the Andries Hudde Building, the school prides itself with being a legacy school as we have attracted generations of families. Intermediate School 381 provides a small, safe, and nurturing learning environment, where high expectations and academic rigor is valued. Rigorous instruction is emphasized in all disciplines in order for students to establish a strong foundation for high school and beyond. Although small, the school provides an enriched and robust academic program that is comparative to other large middle schools in the district. In addition, to providing all students with instruction that is challenging, motivating and tailored to their needs, IS 381 is committed to providing students with the opportunity to engage in rigorous, accelerated coursework at the high school level. The school provides accelerated coursework in Common Core Algebra Regents, Living Environment and American History, leading up to Regents credit. In the upcoming 2018-19 academic year, IS 381 will continue to provide opportunity for qualified eighth grade students, that is, those students meeting and/or exceeding proficiency in core content subjects to participate in these accelerated core Regents classes. This past academic year, the school provided American History for the first time to the seventh grade. Now current eighth grade students in the 2018-19 school year, these students will continue the American History curriculum and take the American History Regents in June 2019. The school will continue to start the exposure of these accelerated high school coursework beginning in the seventh grade to select students based on performance from both report card data, as well as NYS 3-8 English Language Arts and Mathematics examinations. In addition to a rigorous academic program, the school for many years has offered students the opportunity to participate in School Wide Enrichment Model (SEM) Program. This will continue in the 2018-19 academic year and will be an integral part of every child's academic program enrolled at IS 381. The SEM program allows students to have voice and choice in enrichment activities of their interest, and exposes students to a vast array of both academic, physical and social activities geared at preparing students to be college and career ready for the twenty first century. Strategic partnerships and special initiatives include our daily afterschool program with New York Edge, formerly Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation (SASF), CHAMPS Program, Girl Be Heard, Algebra for All, College Access For All and the Specialized High School Admissions Test Pilot Program. New York Edge, formerly known as SASF, has been in existence in our school for the past six (6) years and helps to supplement our school program by providing a wide array of activities to our students such as creative dancing, drum-line and sports (soccer, flag football and basketball), as well as various parent engagement outreach activities. The program also provides mentoring to our students via former graduates, currently in high school, who work as Counselors-In-Training (CIT). Girl Be Heard is an afterschool program that began this past academic year, an initiative granted by Councilman Jumaanee Williams. The program's goal is to develop healthy, confident, self-aware young women as activist artists engaged in their school and community. Our seventh grade young ladies who participated last year, flourished in this program and have become advocates for young women, empowering them to rise above their circumstances and to prevail through self-expression in different art forms. In ensuring Equity and Excellence for All and pushing the Chancellor's Priorities, our school became an Algebra For All school during the 2017-18 school year, and will continue with this initiative in the 2018-19 school year. The program's goal is to create pathways so that students complete Algebra no later than the ninth grade. The program has provided opportunity to introduce pre-algebra concepts beginning in the 6th grade. Due to our students avid participation in 0  resources (First in Math and Algebra Nation) provided by the program, the school was granted a total of 30 new ipads and cases to be used for mathematics instruction. For the 2018-19 school year, one additional teacher will be joining the program, a Special Education teacher who supports math instruction, giving us a total of three teachers participating, one on each grade level. Additionally, in the 2018-19 school year, in keeping with the Equity and Excellence For All Agenda, the school will participate in another Chancellor's initiative, College Access for All . The focus is to provide students in middle school beginning in the seventh grade opportunity to visit college campuses and begin the thought process for becoming college and career ready. Although the program's focus is on the seventh grade, we have included eighth grade students to be part of the initiative as well, since their first unit of English Language Arts curriculum, Scholastic Codex, currently being used by the school, focuses on college preparation and readiness. As of now, our students are receiving the opportunity to visit the following colleges and develop partnerships: CUNY Medgar Evers, College of Staten Island and Bronx Community College. We are hoping before the end of the academic year that more college tours are added, including a possibility of an out-of-state college tour. This academic school year, IS 381 has developed a partnership with Early Relationship Abuse Prevention Program (Early RAPP), a program designed to address and educate students, teachers, parents and the community on building healthy relationships in our youth, addressing topics such as teen dating violence and abuse. The program which began this fall, will focus on helping students to develop healthy and rewarding relationships with their peers. Developing relationship skills such as the ability to communicate clearly, cooperate with others, resist inappropriate social pressure, negotiate conflict constructively, as well as seek and offer help when needed will be foundational and will serve to foster our students' social and emotional learning. SHSAT Pilot Program which we applied and received a grant in the 2017-18 academic year, began in the Spring of 2018 with two classes of seventh grade students, and is a part of a menu of initiatives that aim to increase access and diversity at the eight Specialized High Schools. The aim of the program was to identify schools with high-performing students from under-represented backgrounds, and support the schools in providing test-prep support at no cost to families, as well as administering the SHSAT at their schools on a regular day. The SHSAT School Day Administration Pilot Program has continued during the 2018-19 with our returning students continuing the test preparation that began in the Spring. Interested 8th grade students of IS 381 will take the Specialized High School Admissions Test on November 1st in our building for the first time, providing a comfortable testing environment with less student test anxiety. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Populations at Intermediate School 381 include our English as a New Language (ENL) and Students With Disabilities (SWDs) population. ENL students make up approximately 12 % of our school community. Although the ENL student population is very diverse with students , the preponderance of our ENL students are Russian and Uzbek speaking. Our ENL students encounter many challenges due to the language barrier and struggle in their acquisition of the English Language. Out of thirty one (31) ENL students who took the NYS ELA exam only six (6) were proficient representing 19% of our ENL population. In Mathematics out of forty two (42) ENL students who sat for the NYS Math exam only five (5) were proficient, representing 12% of our ENL population. As a result, they require a lot of support and academic intervention with English Language Arts, Mathematics, as well as in the content area subject areas. In analyzing results from the 2018 NYSESLAT exams, our current seventh and eighth grade students improved in their NYSESLAT proficiency level (55%). However, many of these students, although increasing in level on the NYSESLAT exams are still not performing proficiently on NYS English Language Arts exam. Like our ENL student population, SWDs also encounter many academic challenges as well. Based on the results from the NYS ELA exams sixteen (21%) of our SWDs (8 out of 38 students) were proficient. Results from the NYS Math exam showed very similar trends, only approximately 11% were proficient (4 out of 38 students). Therefore, although the 1  school had an 18% increase in ELA and a 9% increase Math, our special student populations (ENL and SWDs) are not growing at the rate of their non-ENL and non-disabled peers respectively. However, where appropriate SWDs and ENL students who demonstrate special aptitude are mainstreamed into advanced Regents coursework. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Based on the results of the 2017-18 School Quality Guide, IS 381 made the most progress in the areas of Rigorous Instruction and Collaborative Teachers. With respect to Rigorous Instruction our school moved from an overall score of 3.35 in the 2016-17 academic year to an overall score of 4.39 in the 2017-18 academic year, an increase of 1.04. We were above both the district and city averages. With respect to Collaborative teachers our overall score increased by 0.99, from 3.81 in the 2016-17 academic year to 4.80 in the 2017-18 school year. For the 2018-19, our area of focus in the Framework for Great Schools will be in the area of Supportive Environment for our students. Strategic partnerships and special initiatives to provide a supportive environment to our students will include our daily afterschool program with New York Edge, formerly Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation (SASF), Girl Be Heard, CHAMPS Sports Program and Early RAPP. IS 381 will continue it's partnership with community-based organization,New York Edge. The program began four years ago and has expanded to include increased numbers of students in all grades. New York Edge provides students with a robust and enriched program that includes both academic, sports and enrichment activities, and helps to supplement our daily school program. In addition, it provides a safe haven for students who may have little to no supervision during hours when parents/guardians may still be engaged in their daily work activities. Former graduates return to the program as Counselors In Training (CIT) and work with our current students to mentor and support their talents. Approximately one hundred and twenty (120) students are participating in our daily New York Edge Program activities from 2:30 to 5:30p.m at our school. Activities offered varies in a cyclical fashion so as to most fully engage the students involved. Some of the offerings include technology, basketball, step dance, drum-line, visual arts, study island and library research groups. In addition, in creating a supportive environment for our students we established a partnership with Girl Be Heard from last year and continuing this year in order to provide a platform to empower our young ladies and devise mechanisms in the artistic self expression (art, poetry etc) for coping with adversity and or obstacles that they may encounter. This academic year, we are partnering with Early RAPP for the first time. The program will also on the element of Supportive Environment, as the program will focus on establishing healthy relationships, conflicts and solutions and coping mechanisms. In addition for the 2018-19 academic year, although we attained a 1.04 increase on the element of Rigorous Instruction our school will still continue to make this a priority. In the 2018 -19 academic year, MS 381 will focus on advancing literacy skills for all students, particularly English as a New Language (ENL) learners and Students with Disabilities, in order to improve language and content acquisition. Throughout all subjects, the focus on advanced literacy will be emphasized and embedded in instructional practices. Additionally, the school will still continue it's focus from last year on an interdisciplinary approach to teaching, in order to promote greater collaboration among teachers, build teacher capacity and increase student achievement. In addition, during the 2018-19 school year, MS 381 will continue to address and grow in the other elements identified within "The Chancellor's Framework for Great Schools" with the ultimate goal of increasing our students' achievement. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 22K381 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 244 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 10 11 26 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 16 12 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 69.0% % Attendance Rate 66.4% % Reduced Lunch 15.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 20.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 16.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.09 0% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 54.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YSH YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 40 40 94.6% 1.6% 18.4% 52.5% 9.0% 2.0% 2 26% 6.4 32.9% 60% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A NO YES YSH N/A N/A YES YSH NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Last academic year, 2017-18, IS 381's instructional focus stated that "the school will focus on an interdisciplinary approach to teaching in order to improve both the literacy and mathematical proficiency of all students. Active collaboration among content teachers will be emphasized and encouraged, resulting in interdisciplinary curricular units of study between Math and Science, and English Language Arts and Social Studies respectively." As a result of this collaborative work amongst our teachers, our school results on the New York State English Language Arts and Mathematics demonstrated significant gains in the number of students attaining proficiency. Based on the results of the Spring 2018 NYS Math exams, the school attained another nine percent (9%) increase, above the nine percent (9%) attained the prior year(Spring 2017), in the number of students achieving Mathematics proficiency. The school surpassed it's five percent (5%) target goal. As a result of these gains, our school is now at 33% Math proficiency. Based on the results of the Spring 2018 ELA exams, the school attained an impressive eighteen percent (18%) increase in the number of students attaining proficiency on the NYS ELA exam, increasing the number of students proficient in ELA from thirty seven (37%) to fifty five (55%). Our school's Instructional Focus for the 2018 -19 academic year states, " IS 381 will focus on advanced literacy for all students, particularly subgroups such as English as a New Language (ENL) learners and Special Education students. Throughout all subjects, the focus on advanced literacy will be emphasized and embedded in instructional practices. Additionally, in the quest to advance literacy for all, the school will continue it’s interdisciplinary alignment to teaching through active collaboration among content teachers." In every classroom, the expectation will be for teachers to design and deliver rigorous instruction, utilizing engaging content-rich texts and advanced literacy strategies to promote our goal of advancing literacy for all students, particularly ENLs and SpEds. With the coherence across subjects, this would consequently improve students' literacy skills and language acquisition in the content areas. The ultimate goal of this focus will be to further build teacher capacity and increase student achievement and proficiency in both English Language Arts and Mathematics. With respect to Rigorous Instruction, the school will work towards improving both English Language Arts and Math curricula so that it is robust and challenging for a "variety of students", including SWDs and ENLs. Students will be engaged in rigorous and engaging instruction focused on advanced literacy with the ultimate goal of improving Math and ELA proficiency. In addition, consistent and coherent benchmark assessments will be administered throughout the school year, to monitor and track student progress and demonstrate student improvement in becoming competent in both ELA and Math. Analysis of this data will be used to drive instruction in our regular ELA and Math classrooms, as well as small group Academic Intervention Services (AIS) offered during the school day and our Afterschool Test Preparation Program. During the school day, targeted Math AIS instruction will be offered to students in the 6th and 7th grade students in order to move these students towards our goal of increasing student 4  proficiency in Math. In addition, targeted instruction via MAX Scholar, will also be provided to our ENL student population in order to support our goal of increasing ENL student language acquisition in all content areas. In addition, with respect to rigorous instruction, the school will continue to provide rigorous accelerated coursework in Common Core Algebra, Living Environment and American History to qualified 8th graders, resulting in students graduating the 8th grade with up to 3 high school credits, Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, IS 381 will provide students with rigorous targeted instruction around advanced literacy which will result in a 5% increase in the number of students performing at or above grade level on the New York State Spring 2019 English Language Arts and Mathematics assessments, as well as the NYSESLAT, and Regents exams as measured by a comparison of students’ 2018 results. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Afterschool Test Preparation Program to include a variety of learners including both SWD and ENL students in grades 6, 7, and 8 ENL , SWD, all 6,7,8 Grade students Spring Break ELA and Math Intensive Program Supervisor and IS 381 teachers November 2018 to April 2019 Week of Spring Recess 2019 Small Group Math Academic Intervention (AIS) offered during the day to select students in grades 6 and 7 ENL, SWD, all 6, 7, 8 Sixth grade students with mid to high level 2s in Math; Seventh grade students scoring at a high level 1 October 2018 to June IS 381 Supervisor, 2019 Teachers, Curriculum Workshops to be held at the end of each quarter Parents MS 381 Teachers November 2018 to May 2019 Accelerated coursework in Common Core Algebra, Living Environment and Global/ American History, Regents Test Prep in Common Core Algebra and Living Environment 7th and 8th Grade Students January 2019 to June 2019 MS 381 Supervisors, 6  ENL Enrichment Program (MAX Scholar ) Social-Studies, Math and Science Teachers ENL Students (6, 7, 8) November 2018-June 2019 ENL and ELA teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to increase family engagement and help families support their children at home with respect to Rigorous Instruction, our school community will host quarterly curriculum workshops to engage parents on how they can best support their children by understanding and becoming knowledgeable about Advanced Literacy, Next Generation Standards in ELA, Math and Science, as well as establishing academic activities throughout the school year that are both fun and engaging for both students and parents. The school will pay particular attention to creating awareness among families about the Next Generation Standards and it's implementation for the 2020-2021 academic year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources that will be used to achieve this goal includes investing in a new resources for Regents classes, ELA and Math test preparation materials, including online program IXL that have embedded strategies for supporting ENL students in advanced literacy. In addition to school wide Afterschool Test Preparation Help, the school will continue to provide small group targeted instruction to students who are performing below proficiency during the day in Math, in order to sustain growth and ensure student achievement. Common Planning periods and Instructional cabinet meetings will occur at least once a week in order to ensure coherence among subject areas in the goal for advanced literacy, build teacher capacity and promote student achievement. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Quantitative data from ELA benchmark assessments will be utilized to monitor the progress of continuous improvement towards our school's instructional priority. Students’ performance scores on ELA benchmark assessments will be administered throughout the year, and will be used to monitor student progress towards attaining our 5% goal. In February of 2019 there will be a culminating mid-year assessment to monitor progress towards the end of year goal of achieving 5% increase in student proficiency. The expectation by February mid-point exams is a 3% increase in student progress compared to their performance on baseline exams given at the beginning 7  of year. In addition, students' first and second marking period report card grades will be analyzed to indicate school progress toward meeting the school's instructional priority . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) MS 381 will be using past NYS released questions from Engage NY, Ready NY CCLS and RALLY practice assessments as the benchmark assessments our school will utilize to monitor students' progress towards achieving our school goal. In addition, students' performance on mid and end of unit assessments will also be used to track student progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Data from the School Quality Guide does not show the overall score in Supportive Environment for the 2017-18 school year. However, on the Multi-Year Summary of the School Quality Guide it shows that under the element of Supportive Environment in 2016 we received an overall score of 3.46, this score dropped to 3.19 in 2017. In addition, looking at the components under supportive environment on the most recent School Quality Guide, although above the district and city wide averages in all components (classroom behavior, guidance, peer support for academic work, social-emotional), there are still alot of areas that can be improved. For example, 62% of our students reported there was a positive classroom behavior. In the 2018-19 school year, in order to improve on this specific component, our school will continue to provide a supportive environment for students through our Positive Behavior Intervention System (PBIS) Program. Members of the community of learners at MS381 will identify monthly targets and incentives relative to adherence to our PBIS elements of PRIDE (Personal Responsibility, Respect, Integrity, Determination and Engagement), Respect For All Initiative as well as to the the NYC Discipline Code. Advisory/peer mediation sessions will also be established to provide behavioral, social and emotional supports to our students. In addition, in order to provide a supportive environment in the component of peer support for academic work, our school will continue celebrating students' academic achievement through our school-wide quarterly Honor Roll Ceremonies during the day. By providing both the Honor Roll and PRIDE ceremonies during the day, the hope is that the impact will be an increased number of students attaining these accolades as the school year progresses, as they will seek to emulate their peers. Through the SHSAT Pilot Program our school will continue to provide support environment in the component of guidance. The program will provide workshops for school staff (teachers and guidance counselor), as well as parents on the SHSAT application process and expectations. In addition, supporting students in becoming college and career ready by partnering with College Access for All, so that students get the opportunity to visit both local and national colleges. The goal for the 2017-18 school year is that every student would have at least visited one college by the end of the academic year. Students will also be encouraged to participate in our daily afterschool, New York Edge Program, where they work with teachers from our school who are part of the program and receive mentoring from former graduates. New York Edge Afterschool Program provides a positive outlet for students, providing students opportunity to be involved in several engaging activities including Dance Team, Art, and Girls Empowerment to name a few. Graduates of IS 381 are part of the mentoring program in the New York Edge Afterschool Program, which will be beneficial to our current students in helping to provide a supportive environment, as well as a platform for positive reinforcement for our students. In addition, many of New York Edge staff members are also part of our school staff and further contribute to providing a supportive environment. Our early morning CHAMPS Program can provide an outlet of further support. Both of these programs support the need for providing student with a supportive environment both in the early morning and during afterschool. Additionally, Early RAPP Program and Girl Be Heard programs will provide an environment of support to all students. 9  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Our goal for the 2018-19 school year relative to supportive environment is to increase by 5% the number of students involved in our before and afterschool programs such as New York Edge Afterschool Program, CHAMPS, Girl Be Heard, as well as the number of students attaining PRIDE and Honor Roll recognition. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Monthly extracurricular events and trips to support and develop our PBIS school-wide project. Projects include identifying and recognizing students on a monthly basis who exemplify the values of PRIDE(Personal Responsibility, Respect, Integrity, Discipline, Engagement) and Respect For All values. In addition, quaterly trips as an incentive for students who received PRIDE/RFA recognition. School-wide combined quarterly Honor Roll and PRIDE ceremony celebrating students' academic and social achievements. In-house Suspension Program and/or SAVE Removal Program for students who fail to adhere to school rules. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students in grades 6, 7, and 8 October 2018 to June 2019 MS381 Supervisors, Teachers, Students and Parents Identified Students in grades 6,7, and 8 September 2018 to June 2019 MS381 Supervisors, Teachers, Students and Parents Daily Advisory/Peer Mediation to help students who have been on a Principal's or Superintendent's suspension to overcome challenges and become better school citizenship, All Students September 2018 to June 2019 MS 381 Supervisor, Dean and Teachers Parent workshops, Curriculum Workshops, Quarterly school-wide and/or specific grade activity All Students October 2018 to June 2019 MS 381 Supervisors, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Teachers, Staff Members of RAPP and New York Edge 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to increase family engagement and help families support their children at home, our school community will host both academic, behavioral and social-emotional based workshops in order to provide a supportive environment. With respect to academic support, quarterly curriculum workshops will be provided to engage parents on how they can best support their child in all subjects. In addition through partnership with a selected College Access For All vendor, parent workshops will also be provided to support parents with respect to how they can support their child in developing a "college ready attitude", as early as middle school. With respect to behavior, parent workshops will be provided in areas that the school suspension data show prevalence. For example, last year, workshops were provided 1  to students and parents on the effects of smoking e-cigarettes, as the number of students getting suspended for the smoking and/or use of e-cigarettes (B13) . Through partnership with Early RAPP, parent workshops will be provided to help in supporting the child's social and emotional learning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources that will be used to achieve this goal is personnel (School Principal/Assistant Principal/Teachers) has scheduled periods of advisory for identified students requiring behavioral, social and emotional support, and encourage student participation in our before-school and Afterschool Programs. Parent Coordinator together with Guidance Counselor and Principal, as well as school partnerships with New York Edge, RAPP and College Access For All will provide targeted parent workshops to help provide a supportive environment. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Perform mid-year assessment in February of the number of students attending our before-school and Afterschool Programs (CHAMPS, New York Edge, Girl Be Heard), OORS Suspension data, as well as a comparison in the number of students who attain Honor Roll and PRIDE recognition from the first to second quarter. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student attendance from New York Edge and the activities offered, Information from OORS system, Needs Assessment Parent Surveys, Parent attendance data, Report card data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. IS381’s strengths and weaknesses relative to Collaborative Teachers as identified in the most recent School Quality Guide indicate that the school improved in overall score by 0.99 (3.81 to 4.80). Based on the data, in all components of Collaborative Teachers the school scored above a 4.0. Under the component of cultural awareness and inclusive classroom instruction the school scored a 4.17(lowest), which represented 95% of staff and students feeling positive about cultural awareness and inclusiveness. In the 2018-19 school year, the school will provide students and staff with an inclusive, safe and affirming environment. IS 381 administration has an open-door policy to staff and students. This will be maintained throughout the 2018-19 school year. Teachers will also provide a welcoming environment to students, particularly students who during our school-wide lunch period may want to be in a different environment from the cafeteria. Teachers will open their classrooms to students through our lunch n' learn clubs program, which provides and array of activities-Visual Arts, Anime, Student Government, Book Club, Advisement etc. The school will also continue with the "Annual Cultural Awareness Day", where students of diverse backgrounds will receive the opportunity to share their culture with the entire school community and create awareness. In addition, teachers will be encouraged to seek opportunities to attend professional development on culturally responsive teaching (CRT), in order to provide rigorous, inclusive instruction. In the month of October, two teachers will be given two days coverage to work on a plan for school integration on how diversity, inclusion can live in our school. Teachers will also continue to work in collaborative inquiry teams at least twice a week. Collaborative inquiry teams will work on improving curriculum, instruction and assessments, all informed by analysis of student performance data. These meeting are voluntary. Teachers will also learn from each and inter-visitations among teachers encouraged. In addition, MS 381 will strive to work with our JHS 240 administrators and staff to build a safe and welcoming environment for all students in the building. We will continue to have shared campus safety meetings, as well as increase the number of shared staff and parent workshops. In addition, we will continue to have joint community activities such as the IS 240/IS 381 Community Carnival. Last year's collaboration on the End of Year Community Carnival was a successful collaboration between the two schools. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 3  By June 2019, the school will have a 5 % increase in number of students participating in lunch n' learn clubs, the number of teachers attending collaborative inquiry team meetings and teachers performing classroom inter-visitations as compared to 2017-18 data. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Monthly Safety, Programming, Building and Facilities Committee meetings held jointly by JHS 240 and MS381. All staff September2018 to June 2019 Building Supervisors and Appropriate Staff Lunch n' Learn Clubs Teachers October 2018 to May 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal Weekly Joint Department Collaborative Inquiry Teams: Teachers Teacher Inter-visitations to support each other and build teacher capacity Teachers October 2018 to June 2019 October 2018 to March 2019 ALL Teachers ALL Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. As was the case with the 2017-18 academic year, parents will be encouraged to take an active role in school life, through regular attendance of SLT meetings, Parent Teacher Conferences, Afternoon Parent Engagement Time and Breakfast with the Principal, as well as activities such our Annual Cultural Awareness Day. At these meetings and events, parents will hear directly from teachers on how staff work collaboratively to support each other and consequently the students. In addition, this will also provide a platform for empowering parents to voice their concerns and/or recommendations to leadership team, as well as share ways in which they can support staff and the school. For the 2018-19 academic year, our monthly Parent Breakfast with the Principal will have a slight twist to it. As a means of further encouraging and increasing parent participation and involvement, students whose parents are present at the breakfast will be invited to have breakfast alongside their parents and Principal, as well as share their struggles, successes, work that they are proud of, as well as ideas and/or suggestions they may have to improve the quality of student life. Parents will also be invited to our varied workshops, including but not limited to joint curriculum workshops between ELA and Social Studies and Math and Science respectively, as well as ENL and SWD. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 5  Teachers' Programs to include time designated for common planning, alignment of Passport to Social Studies and Expeditionary Curriculum. In addition, building familiarity with Next Generation Standards for Science, Math and ELA. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid -progress monitoring will be done in February to see number of students participating in lunch n' learn clubs, the number of teachers attending collaborative inquiry team meetings and teachers performing classroom inter-visitations as compared to 2017-18 data have increased by at least 3% as compared to data from the previous year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Evaluate Collaborative Team Meetings, Lunch n' Learn clubs, as well as Teacher inter-visitations. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the most recent School Quality Guide, In the area of Effective School Leadership, the school received an overall score of 4.33, above both district and city average. The school did extremely well in the components of instructional leadership, 100% of teachers felt that the principal makes clear to the staff expectations for meeting instructional goals, as well as communicates a clear vision for the school. Under the component of program coherence 100% of teachers agreed that programs offered are connected to the school's instructional vision. Although all components received an overall score above 4.0, the component which was the lowest was 'Inclusive Leadership'. An average of 97% families felt positive about inclusive leadership. The school will continue to encourage parent participation in School Leadership Team meetings, Parent-Teacher Association Meetings, as well as monthly "Breakfast with the Principal". These meetings will provide a platform for empowering parents to voice their concerns and/or recommendations to leadership team, as well as share ways in which they can support staff and the school. For the 2018-19 academic year, our monthly Parent Breakfast with the Principal will have a slight twist to it. As a means of further encouraging and increasing parent participation and involvement, students whose parents are present at the breakfast will be invited to have breakfast alongside their parents and Principal, as well as share their struggles, successes, work that they are proud of, as well as ideas and/or suggestions they may have to improve the quality of student life. In addition, to these monthly meetings, the school will continue to maintain an open-door policy as it did the previous year, and will continue to welcome families into the school to observe their child's learning. IS 381 will build capacity among teachers through the District 22 Ambassador Program. Teacher ambassadors, as well as non-ambassador teachers will be responsible for presenting professional development workshops to staff members during regularly scheduled Monday professional development sessions and/or during Collaborative Inquiry Team Meetings. In addition, both Principal and Assistant Principal will continue to grow and hone their craft by attending monthly conferences offered by the Superintendent and District 22, and become more effective leaders. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 5% of MS381 teachers will improve by one or more HEDI rating levels as a result of supervisory attention by MS381 Principal and Assistant Principals as measured by ADVANCE Measures of Teacher Practice reports compared to last year. 7  In addition, by June 2019, increase parental participation in school-wide meetings (SLT, PTA, Parent Breakfast with the Principal) by 5% as compared to last year. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will be identified by content area to attend District 22 monthly Ambassador meetings Select Teachers Monthly SLT, PTA, Parent Breakfast with the Principal Parents, Families Monday Professional Development Workshops Teachers October 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 October 2018 to June 2019 Assistant Principal and Principal Principal, SLT Chair, Parent Coordinator MS 381 Supervisors and Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to support effective leadership it is critical that parents have a voice in the decision making with respect to curriculum, academic programs, and social-emotional programs offered by the school. Parents will be encouraged to attend SLT meetings, Parent Teacher Conferences, Afternoon Parent Engagement Time and Breakfast with the Principal, where they are able to meet directly with the administrative team and share ideas and suggestions for the school's growth. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Laptops for Teacher PD, Pupil Path and social media to communicate with parents about events, Ambassador Meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 9  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Quarterly cycles of observation relative to teachers’ practices will be carried out. In addition, beginning of year to midyear analyses of teachers’ online observation reports will be generated and analyzed. By February 2019, fifty percent (50%) of Advance observations will have been completed and recorded online. By February 2019, attendance at school wide meetings should indicate a 3% increase towards the end of year goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Measures of Teacher Practice Observation Report; Calendar of On-site Professional Development workshops; Parent Attendance data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the most recent Quality School Guide Report for IS 381, the school received an overall score of 3.97 on the element of Strong Family-Community Ties. On this element of the Framework, the school has had a nice steady increase from 3.22 (2016), 3.46 (2017) and 3.97 (2018). The component, outreach to parents, had an average rating of 95% of parents and families being positive on the parent outreach. Of that 95% average rating 97% of families stated that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit the school, whereas only 81% of families stated that they got opportunity to visit their child's classroom. The component, parent involvement in school, received an average rating of 86% of families had a positive experience. Of that 86% average rating 94% of parents state they have seen samples of their child's work products(art, projects, quizzes), 83% stated that they have communicated with their child's teacher on academic performance, and 735 state that they have had the opportunity to support their school. In looking at the above data, the school will continue to keep in active communication with parents with our recently purchased io-classroom, where student academic progress, attendance and punctuality, as well as school activities will be shared with families throughout the school year. Student academic progress will also be communicated through mid-quarter progress reports. The school will also encourage parents to attend Parent Breakfast with the Principal which occurs during the day. During this time, as was done in the previous year, parents will be welcomed to visit classrooms and observe the learning that takes place in their child's classroom. In addition, the school will continue to maintain an open-door policy for families. Families wishing to visit will be provided the opportunity upon request. Parents are encouraged to communicate with teachers via io-classroom , as well as during regularly scheduled afternoion parent engagement time. In the 2018-19 school year, new methods of engaging families in the educational process will be employed including our new io classroom, monthly breakfast with the principal, ongoing communication with parents via School messenger system, School Express App, on-site parent workshops offered every quarter, mid-quarter progress reports, parent engagement time. In addition, parents will be encouraged to participate in SLT and PTA meetings. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In the 2018-19 school, our goal is to demonstrate an increase in parent involvement by 5% via the active engagement in school activities, such as monthly meetings held by the Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselor workshops, Breakfast with the Principal. and use of School APP Express and io-classroom. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Monthly onsite SLT and Parent-Teacher Association meetings Teachers, parents September 2018 to June 2019 Parent Coordinator and UFT Chapter Leader Third Thursday of each month for a minimum of one hour. Breakfast with the Principal every first Friday of the Month Parents On-site Parent Workshops Parents Mid-Quarter Progress reports Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 2018 to June 2019 MS 381 Administrators, Parent Coordinator October 2018 to June 2019 MS 381 Administrators, Teachers, Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselor All Teachers October 2018 to June 2019 If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. New York Edge (CBO), Girl Be Heard and Early RAPP are the school's partnerships, which help to support families by providing both academic and social programs during afterschool hours daily. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Available Title 1 Parent Involvement and other resources will be utilized to purchase SchoolApp Express and io-classroom system to encourage better communication with parents. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monthly reports written and submitted by the Parent Coordinator (PCAR); Quarterly reports submitted by identified supervisors. By February 2019 there will be an increase of at least 3% in the total number of parents attending monthly meetings(Breakfast with Principal, SLT, PTA) and at parent workshop offerings as compared to 2017-2018 midyear totals. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Attendance Data at monthly meetings, parent-engagement time and parent teacher conferences. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Direct instruction Small group School day Direct instruction Small group School day Direct instruction Small group School day Direct instruction Small group School day As mandated As mandated School day Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) State and Local Measures of Student Learning State and Local Measures of Student Learning State and Local Measures of Student Learning State and Local Measures of Student Learning Online Occurrence and Reporting System and Special Education Support and Information System data; Individualized Educational Plan and SESIS data relative to Counseling, Speech and other related services 4  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. General supplies including uniform attire and school supplies. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 2 2 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 5  not applicable 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Not applicable 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All IS381 teachers within the 2017-18 school organization are highly qualified as defined by NYS teacher certification requirements. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Monday afternoon professional development sessions will be presented by school staff, district and NYCDOE authorized staff members as per contractual guidelines. These activities will enable students to meet common core learning standards. As mentioned in the Section on Collaborative Teachers, capacity will be built among school staff through the District 22 Ambassadors Program. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not Application 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not Applicable 7  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Not Applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. MOSL Committees and procedures as required of NYC schools in 2018-19 academic year including benchmark and midyear examinations; end of year MOSL teacher effectiveness ratings. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 202,057 0 0 0 2,145,210 X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 8 Column B Section Reference(s) See Overview See Overview  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  9   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. I.S 381, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Middle School 381 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 1  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 2  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Middle School 381, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 3  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 4 I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 5  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 6  ● always try my best to learn. 7  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: ENL students will be an integral part of our Saturday Academy. Direct instruction to improve the language acquisition, as well as improve the Math Proficiency of ENL students will be provided by ENL teacher as well as core subject teachers in both English Language and Mathematics. The program is scheduled to begin in mid-November and come to a close at the end of March. The program will run for three hours from 9:00 AM to 12:00 PM, comprising of an hour and a half of ELA and Math instruction respectively. In addition, to providing targeted instruction to ENL students, parents of ENL students will also be invited to attend two workshops on how parents can support their ENL child at home and high school preparedness. Common Core aligned ELA and Math materials will be used for instruction. These materials are supplemental and distinct from what is used for daily instruction. In addition, to ELL students other subgroups will be serviced during the Saturday program. Accurate attendance records will be maintained by the Supervisor of the program. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The ENL teacher, as well as English Language Arts teacher/s will be responsible for providing professional development to core subject teachers of ENL students during Monday Professional Development. These teachers have been attending workshops and receiving professional development through Ambassador Program, as well as through Advanced Literacy Institute provided by the District. Professional development will include topics such as strategies for teaching ENL students, classroom resources to assist ENL students in core subjects, Universal Design for Learning(UDL) practices, as well as introduce models of ENL instruction such as co-teaching/push in strategies. This is critical as this will assist core subject teachers in addressing the needs of ENL students and help them to better support the learning of ENL students. Professional Development will be provided once every two months for approximately one hour. Record of agendas and attendance will be stored with the ENL teacher. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration 9  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities topics to be covered   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: Parent engagement activities targeted toward ENL parents will include quarterly workshops. Each workshop will be offered twice, once during afternoon Parent Engagement time, and the second in the evening in order to accommodate parents' schedules. Parents will engage in workshops that will emphasize ways parents can support their child at home in core subjects such as ELA and Math, as well as activities that are geared towards assisting parents in their own personal growth. Workshops will typically last for one hour. Both teachers of core subjects and ENL teacher, as well supervisors will be responsible for conducting these parent engagement activities. Parents will be notified in varied forms, including via School App Express, io-classroom, letters sent electronically, as well hard copy backpacked home with students. Backpacked letters will be sent in both English and translated versions of the student's home language via Google Translate. On site school staff will assist with direct translation during these workshops. Support staff languages spoken include Russian, Spanish, and Haitian Creole. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $7421  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel $1236 $2473 NA Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Teachers will receive paid per session for providing instruction during Saturday Academy to ELL students. Professional Development will be provided for staff members to assist and support teachers of ELL students. Use for purchase of common core aligned curricular materials for ELL students in the Saturday Program. NA 0 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA Parent Engagement activities such as ELL workshops to support ELL students and their parents. NA Other TOTAL NA $1236 $12366 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 22 School Name Middle School 381 Borough Brooklyn School Number 381 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Victoria Hippolyte-Agard Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Viktoriya Rekheler Teacher/Subject Area ENL Teacher/Subject Area Susan Campbell Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Julia Bove Assistant Principal Patrick Lawler Coach type here School Counselor Rebecca Jompulsky Parent Ms. Amirkulova Parent Coordinator Michelle Turner Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 260 2 Total number of ELLs 45 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 17.31%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Lang. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tool that will be used to assess the early literacy skills of all students at MS 381, including ENL students, is the beginning and end of year New York City Performance Assessment from Measures of Student Learning (MOSL). In addition, the ENL teacher will also administer NYSITELL and NYSESLAT, which will assess students' understanding in speaking, writing, listening and reading of the English language. We will evaluate the success of our program for ENLs through progress monitoring of ENL students based on the results of both summative and formative assessments, as well as the student's performance on New York State examinations. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Quarterly benchmark assessments are administered and used to monitor the progress of all students in achieving proficiency in ELA and Math Proficiency. Item Analyses from these benchmark exams will provide valuable data that will be used to monitor the growth of ENL students specifically and assist in targeting instruction in order to advance both their language and 3  content acquisition. Small group Academic Intervention (AIS) is embedded in the school program to provide additional support for ENL students. ENL students will receive additional support at least twice a week using Max Scholar to assist with their language acquisition. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our program for ENLs based on the results of formative and summative assessments, high stakes accountability performance assessments (meeting AYP) as well as the students’ performance across the curriculum. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? During the day AIS will be used to address interventions once summative data has been gathered. Students requiring further intervention will be provided with small group targeted instruction based on deficiencies identified from item analyses of summative assessments. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Both NYSITELL and NYSESLAT are used to evaluate and inform our school's ENL program. Based on student performance on NYSITELL over the past few years, proficiency levels of newly admitted students have been predominantly at the beginner's level for students across all grades. Conversely, NYSESLAT student performance has demonstrated proficiency mainly at the intermediate level and/or advanced level for all students across all grades. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Being a small school, many of our teachers interact with ENL students daily. Therefore, teachers have to be aware of who the ENL students are, as well as their levels (emerging, entering, transitioning etc) so that they are able to support their learning. Such information is disseminated to teachers via our Monday Afternoon Professional Development sessions. They received documents such as RLAT, which provides students' ENL levels, number of years as ENL, as well as performance on all sections of the NYSESLAT. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. With four classes on a grade, ENL students are placed in two of these four classes. Content teachers, together with the ENL teacher of these classes are encouraged to utilize one or more of the seven co-teaching strategies of Honigsfeld and Dove during the integrated program. We believe that in order for students to acquire language it is best that they be grouped with their non-ENL peers. On the other hand, during the Freestanding Program students are grouped homogenously rather than 4  heterogeously based on their levels. Therefore, students from the different grades may be grouped together if they are at the same level. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. There is a Freestanding ENL pull-out program in I.S. 381. This school year we have the following breakdown of English Language Learners students: 4 Spanish, 6 Haitian Creole, 10 Russian, 2 Arab, 2 Urdu, 2 Georgian, 1 Bengali,1 Tadzhik, 1 French, and 15 Uzbek students. There are nineteen sixth graders, thirteen seven graders, and twelve eighth graders. In sixth grade we have 4 students at the Entering level, 3- at the Emerging level, 5 - at the transitioning, and 7- at the Expanding level, and 3 - at the Commanding level. In seventh grade we have 4 students at the Entering level, 1 students at the Emerging level, 3 - at the Transitioning level, 5 - at the Expanding, and 7 - at the Commanding level. In eighth grade we have, 2 students at the Entering level, 2 students - at the Emerging level, 4 students - at the Expanding level, and 10 - at the Commanding level. All of them receive the mandatory minutes of instruction in ENL(Part 154-2, K-8) such as: Entering level - 180 min. of ENL and 180 min. of INT, Emerging - 90 min. of ENL and 90 min. of INT and 90 min. in any of the previous, Transitioning - 90 min. of INT and 90 min of ENL or INT, Expanding - 180 min of INT, Commanding - 90 min. of INT a week. The transition from one level to the next is made according to the scores of NYSESLAT that takes place at the end of each school year. All ELL’s take content area state tests, excluding, in some cases, ELA. The program offered at our school aligns with what parents have been requesting. b. ENL instruction is based on four modalities: Reading, Writing, Listening and Speaking. The weakest one for all ELLs is writing. During lessons, students participate in small groups, task-oriented activities that guide the production of language both in verbal and written form. They use textbooks, library and instructional materials that are aligned with the school’s core curriculum and reflect language of instruction. One of the criteria to determine what instruction the ELLs receive in ENL, is the NYSESLAT test. The ENL teacher analyses their scores in the writing, reading, listening, and speaking parts of the test. Based on that, students receive different target instruction during ENL lessons as well as in other subjects. We evaluate the success of our program for ELLs based on the results of formal and informal assessment tests as well as the students’ performance across the curriculum.The school has implemented an instructional program that regularly ensures continuity of language development to meet the Common Core Learning standerts. Teachers scaffold academic language throughout the curriculum to assure students’ participation in content areas. They use visuals to support students’ understanding. Those ELLs who are in the program for more tham one year, take Common Core subject tests. They are aligible for taking the tests in their native language as well as to receive all ELL testing accomodations. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our school organizational structure ensures that students have the mandated number of instructional minutes provided to them. As mentioned before, ENL students are placed in two out of the four classes on each grade level. Therefore, the ENL teacher 5  works with these classes for the integrated programs. ENL teacher is also able to easily pull out students at the same time (during a non-major subject) to receive free standalone program. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Scholastic Codex contains appropriate language development supports for ENL students.The stories that are based on the students’ culture help to connect to their prior experiences. Students are taught close readingstrategies to help better understand the text and find the gist of the story. The instruction is designed to mediate the learning of various proficiency classifications: newcomers, SIFE, long terms ELL’s, beginner, intermediate and advance proficiency levels. This school year we do not have SIFE students. Long-term ELLs are getting mandatory minutes of instruction in ENL along with additional help in content areas. For newcomers teachers model the use of language in the ways in which students could participate. Language functions, language structures, and vocabulary lessons are planned as part of every topic. We provide students who are less proficient in language the necessary time to interact with those who are more proficient. However, newcomers are guided by the ENL teacher throughout the whole lesson. The special education students that participate in the program are able to work with their classmates according to their level of English proficiency. At the same time they receive rigorous instruction on the topic of the lesson. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? As appropriate, students are tested in the native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status At present, no SIFE students are in attendance. Newcomers have intensive instruciton as needed and support in their native language. Parents and family members are engaged in the progam. Native language support is systematic and not limited to the ENL classroom in our school. In addition to glossaries, dictionaries, and materials in the native language of ELLs, our school personnel assist students during the school day by providing whole group academic intervention services in core subjects of Englisg language Arts and Mathematics. Students also use various technology to support their learning of content material, such as i-pad, laptops and kindle. Our students receive help with content and concepts (in their native language) in their subject-area classes. Teachers group students of the same language for different activities so they can assist each otherand respond in their native language. In addition to that, the ELLs participate in after and before school programs, as well as in summer school. The students who have reached the proficiency level (tested out of the NYSESLAT), continue getting help across the content areas. For students who are longer-term ELLs, instructional time is limited and the teacher provides additional subject area support. Former ELLs are supported by the ENL teacher with respect to promoting ongoing academic success. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Strategies are adapted as needed to best meet the learning needs of students with disabilities (SWD). Flexibility enables our school to foster the achievement of IEP goals for all SWDs. Schedules are flexible, an open door parent policy is in effect. Of the more than 60 students with disabilities in attendance at MS381, the majority of students with IEPs are members of collaborative team classes. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 6  Flexibility enables our school to foster the achievement of IEP goals for all SWDs. Schedules are flexible, an open door parent policy is in effect. Of the more than 60 students with disabilities in attendance at MS381, the majority of students with IEPs are members of collaborative team classes.: 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our AIS program is fully inclusive and involves all students with disabilities and ELLs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? An increased emphasis on the use of technology 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. We have both afterschool and Saturday supplemental programs. ELLs are involved and attending both. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We have adopted the Expeditionary Learning system for Language Arts 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered as needed in our ESL and regular class programming in several languages. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All services support and correspond to middle level instructional strategies and adolescent levels of development. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We have adopted the Scholastic Codex for Language Arts 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Summer school opportunities are afforded to newly enrolled ELL students. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? As offered in the regular school program 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NOT APPLICABLE 7  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school mirrors that of our English Language Arts teachers. Our ELL teacher also participates in specific professional development activities offered by network, district, and central office staff for Teachers of English for Speakers of Other Languages. Common Core Learning Standards are addressed in English Language Arts using the Expeditionary Program. Transition to high school is a difficult time for many middle school students, particularly for ELLs. Our School Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principal and teachers help make students' journey beyond Middle School 381 a smooth and successful one. As required by legal mandates, teachers participate in job embedded and explicit training relative to successful strategies for teachers of ELLs. Assistant Principals and our Teacher of English to Speakers of Other Languages provide supervisory and colleagialsupport, respectively. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? N/A 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. N/A Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. NOT APPLICABLE 8  9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Victoria Hippolyte- Agard, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Viktoria Hippolyte-Agard Principal Patrick Lawler Assistant Principal Michelle Turner Parent Coordinator Viktoriya Rekheler ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Amirkulova Parent Susan Campbell Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Rebecca Jompulsky School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 22K381 School Name: Middle School 381 Superintendent: Julia Bove The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Rekheler Viktoriya Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to assess language preferences, Middle School 381 uses the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS). 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English SPANISH 161 32 64.66 12.45 153 33 61.45 13.25 2  TURKMEN ALBANIAN TURKISH1 TADZHIK (AKA TAJIK) URDU UZBEK GEORGIAN CHINESE ANY BASQUE Russian Arabic BENGALI (BANGLA IN BANGLADESH) Haitian Creole 0 1 1 2 4 2 2 1 0 16 5 4 19 0 0.4 o.4 0.8 1.61 0.8 0.8 0.4 0 6.43 2.01 1.46 7.63 1 1 1 2 6 2 2 2 1 16 5 5 18 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.8 2.41 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.4 6.43 2.31 2.01 7.23BENGALI (BANGLA IN BANGLADESH) 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. not applicable. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Quarterly Parent Teacher Conference Fliers and Information October, January, March Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. School communication (letters, notices etc) to parents of ENL students are translated to their home language via Google Translator. In addition, all NYC DOE generated letters are always provided in alternate languages, which are backpacked home to students in their preferred home language . Direct parent communication is made via phone contact with NYC DOE Translation Services and/or on-site 3  School Calendar with school closings September and rolling basis NYS Grades 3-8 Testing Information February School activities/functions Year long staff members who speak parents native language. NYC DOE website NYC DOE website Google Translator 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Parent Teacher Conferences October, January, March Parent Workshop on Supporting their Children at Home/Curriculum Workshops November Parent Workshop on Testing February/March Parent-Principal Breakfast Monthly provide interpretation service(s)? LAC coordinator/ENL Teacher, Translated letter in preferred language ENL teacher and/or other staff member who speak parent preferred language. ENL teacher and/or other staff member who speak parent preferred language ENL teacher and/or other staff member. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school's communication strategies include calling families via Translation Services and/or utilize staff members that are fluent in that particular foreign language and have them communicate with the parents via phone conversation and/or email. Secondly, provide translated versions of a take home letter. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Discuss at Monday afternoon Professional Development. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 4  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Limited-English Proficient parents will be aware of their right to receive information via letters and flyers set home. In addition, parents will be encouraged to attend parent engagement events such as PTA meetings, monthly Breakfast with the Principal, workshops, events celebrating their students' achievements, as well as school-wide events such as Family Fun nights and International Family Nights. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school utilizes needs assessment surveys both at the beginning and end of the school year. 5 
