 17K398 School Name: P.S. 398 WALTER WEAVER Principal: TAMMY KATAN BROWN   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 17K398 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Walter Weaver 331700010398 PreK-5 60 East 94 th Street Brooklyn NY 11212 718-774-4466 Phone Number: Fax: Tammy Katan-Brown TKatanB@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: Tammy Katan-Brown Patricia Adams Jacqueline Crichlow Patricia Adams SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Jacqueline Crichlow none None none District Information Geographical District: 17 Clarence Ellis Superintendent: 1224 Park Place Brooklyn NY 11213 Superintendent’s Office Address: CEllis3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-923-5179 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn-South FSC: N/A Executive Director: 415 89th Street, Room 409 Brooklyn NY 11209 Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: N/A N/A 718-953-4428 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Tammy Katan-Brown Patricia Adams Jacqueline Crichlow Debra Geathers ChristanaWhite LukishiaWade Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Member/ Parent Member/Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) RoshniMontaque Pierre Dupuy Vernalyn Rowe Loraine Boston Jennifer Trotman Member/UFT Member/ UFT Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission statement is “Our entire school community is dedicated to achieving high standards of academic excellence for all of our students. Through professional, high quality, standards based, data driven instruction and a nurturing environment, we will create lifelong learners who are equipped with the civic, social and technological skills needed for the future.”   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS398K is a school located on the border of East Flatbush, Crown Heights and Brownsville. P. S. 398 was built in 1977 and is an open-module school. PS398K is a school, which has shown improvement over the past few years. The school lacks technology and many resources. Our school’s motto is “Small school, big dream.” Staff members with a smile greet children daily. P.S. 398K believes it is important to build a strong home and school connection. Our school aims to collaborate with parents and the surrounding community to create a safe, supportive, nurturing environment that respects the individuality of our students. We believe that children learn in the context of interactions and relationships with family members, caregivers, teachers, and other children in their immediate environment and in their community. The family is a significant contributor to children’s lifelong learning and development. We actively engage parents in the early education of their children through parent volunteerism. We believe that these early interactions with parents and family members are essential to children’s success in the elementary classroom and later learning. Our school’s trajectory is moving forward, We see the school excelling, cognizant that it is a progressive process. We are proud of the progress we have made at the “Small school, big dreams.” In collaboration with Office of Adult and Continuing Education, Region 7- We are honored to host Adult Education classes in the evenings and mornings to the parents of the PS398K school community and adults within the community who have voiced a need for the classes. The PS398K community is honored to participate in the Foster Grandparent Program. This is a federally funded senior volunteer program sponsored by the NYC Department for the aging. The Foster Grandparent Program is a national senior volunteer opportunity provided for eligible seniors age 60 and over to work with children with special needs and/ or exceptional needs. The Foster Grandparents assist all of the students in our school community. This program is an asset to our school community, as one third of classes on a grade are special needs classes. The Grandparents speak several languages, which is beneficial as we have students speaking Spanish and Haitian Creole. The Foster Grandparents, or ‘’Grandmas and Grandpas” as they are affectionately known in our school community, create meaningful relationships with the children who have exceptional needs. They can be seen donning red vests and smocks throughout the building. They provide our children with love, encouragement, and companionship on a one-to one basis. As a result of having Foster Grandparents in our school, students are exposed to the experiences and talents of seniors, which help improve the lives of our children in need. The Foster Grandparents help children who have been abused and neglected and serve as surrogate parents to our school community. We are pleased to be graced with the presence of the Foster Grandparents on a daily basis. We are also excited to have the Community Based Organization at PS398K, The Friends of Crown Heights. The Friends of Crown Heights is an Out of School Time Program (OST). The program serves elementary school students from Monday through Friday, from 3:00 p.m.-6:00 p.m. The children participate in diverse activities, which enhance their cognitive, social and physical development. The activities provided are academic tutorials, arts and crafts, music, and movement, organized sports and life skills and the children are served nutritious meals. After looking at the demographics of our school community, low income, often single -parent families that can ill afford quality child care, it was decided that our community would benefit from an OST Program. The program accommodates an underserved 0  population of children and families needing OST services. During holiday vacations, OST offers programs at the school for our children who would otherwise be roaming the streets, or be left alone at home, with the potential of danger. As a result of having this program in our school, our children are receiving a balance of academic enhancement activities and recreational activities. We have also noticed a decrease in the number of students picked up late on a daily basis and students have expressed a joy of attending the program. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. PS398K has a partnership with Counseling in Schools and The Office of New York City Department of Education Students in Temporary Housing Program. The Program is known as Students Making A Real Transition (SMART) Program. The program provides afterschool services to students residing in temporary housing. Students are provided with group counseling and art therapy. Parents of the students in the program are also provided with workshops and counseling. During the school year 2017-2018, approximately, 43 % of our student population resided in temporary housing. Many of these students have knowledge and skill gaps that resulted from the many interruptions in their education due to their frequent relocation. Due to the ability of schools to create their own CCLS aligned curriculum, these students need extensive diagnostic assessments and require a level of differentiated instruction to address their gaps. A greater need of these students is the social, emotional, physical requirements that result from frequent relocation and the plight of homelessness. Our school has a huge transient population, which affects our attendance rate. We have systems and structures in place to address the attendance issues and positive incentives for the students with perfect or improved attendance. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school has made the most progress over the past year in the area of teacher collaboration. The teachers at our school are supported at team meetings via sharing strategies and best practices through inter-visitations. Teacher leaders organize inter-visitations and conduct demonstration lessons to highlight exemplars of effective instructional practices based on the discussions during the team meetings. The area of focus for the 2018-19 school year is to improve student instruction through rigorous informed teaching. Our focus will be to align assessments to curricula, use formative assessments to shape our curriculum, normalize the grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels. High-quality instruction is the strongest influence on student achievement. We will help teachers acquire skills and develop expertise by providing opportunities for them to grow, and learn from peers and experts. Teachers must be committed to student success and driven to improve their academic performance. Strong teachers innovate and hone their practice through continuous learning and frequent professional development that challenges students, scaffolds their experience, and is enlivened by teachers who are engaged with their craft. The curriculum must meet students 1  where they are and customize inclusive, motivating instruction. Rigorous instruction aligns practice and content to Common Core strategies within and across grades. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 17K398 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 297 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 62 62 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 16 18 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 93.9% % Reduced Lunch 9.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 7.1% 7.7% 2.0% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.08 0% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 19.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 97% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A YSH NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A YSH YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 25 25 90.4% 2.7% 25.6% 81.5% 1.3% 7.4% 4 3% 4.5 27.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based upon our most recent review of school level data, we have identified the following strengths: Across classrooms, student work products and discussions reflect even levels of student thinking and participation  Teachers work collaboratively to analyze data, plan and make decisions  We have established a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations all grades, teachers Based upon a review of our most recent school level data, we have identified the following needs: Based on the 2018 New York State Math Exam ● 28% of the students in grade 3-5 demonstrated proficiency in mathematics Based on the 2018 New York Sate ELA Exam  20% of the students in grades 3-5 demonstrated proficiency in English Language Arts Based upon a closer look at all school level data, we have identified the following priority needs: 4  To improve students understanding how to strategically solve real word problems involving various operations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 3% increase in the number of students scoring level 3 and 4 (General Ed, Special Ed, and ELLs) as measured by the New York State ELA Assessment. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Assistant Principal- Lead Teachers, Borough Field Office Support Center Achievement Coaches All teachers will engage in professional development and will implement use of writing journals for student to reflect and explain their reasoning and thought process. Classroom Teachers Beginning Sept 6, 2018 through June 26, 2019, Teachers will work collaboratively during professional development common planning time to develop rubrics which are aligned to the CCLS Align the curriculum to the CCLS scope and sequence monthly, plan and implement common core aligned curriculum and integrate instructional shifts that focus on building strong foundational skills, academic language, promote critical thinking through reading, writing, listening and speaking. Provide feedback to students on targeted skills to support students to self and peer assess Engage in a weekly cycle of analyzing student data and work products and using the findings to create, differentiate and modify instruction for groups of students and individual students. Foster daily student to student discussion; encourage student engagement through responding and extending their thinking, crafting questions for clarity and elaboration of their thinking. 6  There will be a weekly morning enrichment academy to provide supplementary instruction in mathematics. Daily AIS teachers will provide additional support to the lowest 1/3 in the area of writing mathematical explanations All students School’s Lowest 1/3 January 9, 2019 and will end March 31, 2019 Assistant Principal, Classroom Teachers , Lead Teachers AIS, ESL, and SPED Teachers All Parents -Sept. 2018-June 2019 Sept. 2018-June 2019 School Administration, Parent Coordinator, Lead Teachers, Borough Field Office Support Center Achievement Coaches Monthly Parents will be provided with training and materials to assist them with understanding the new Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) curriculum. Information will be shared about the school and parent related programs, meetings and other related activities in a format translated into languages that parents can understand, so that they may best assist their child. To support transparency, monthly newsletters from the principal and monthly calendars from the Parent Coordinator provide information regarding upcoming school and citywide events. Through school leadership and PTA Meetings, parents work collaboratively with school leaders in planning and making decisions that support the education of their children. The school staff will provide training to parents in the use of NYC Schools Account to facilitate the understanding of City, State and Federal standards and assessments. School staff will share information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format translated into languages that parents can understand, so they may best assist their child. Rigorous Instruction are emphasized in curricula including (Passport Social Studies) and academic tasks are embedded in a coherent way across grades for ELLs and SWDs All students and subgroups September 2018- June 2019 Assistant Principals, Principal, Lead Teachers (ELLs & SWDs 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will complete a survey to identify the needs/ interests. Parent workshops will be offered to address the identified needs in the survey as well as our monthly curriculum aligned to the CCLS. and academic rigor. 7  We will also engage parents with wrap around services , partnering with local hospitals ,and community based organizations such as Friends of Crown Heights. Parents will be invited to attend culminating units of study celebrations. The Parent Coordinator, Family workers, Social Worker, Guidance Counselor, Parent Teacher Association President, Teachers, and Brooklyn South Field Support Staff. Timeline- October 2018-June 2019 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will participate in weekly common planning time twice per week for 45 minutes as a professional periods. Teachers will participate in weekly professional development for 75 minutes Four days per week for 12 weeks of teachers' per session 1 teacher dedicated to providing AIS services Office supplies for newsletters and presentations, 1 staff member serving as parent coordinator, teachers communicating with parents 40 minutes per week Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, a minimum 3 percent of students in grades 3-5 will improve to levels 3 or 4 as measured by the most recent MOSL exam results. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The instrument of measure will be the MOSL Scantron exams. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on a review of our most recent data, we have identified the following school level strengths: During our 2014-2015 Quality Review, the school received a proficient on indicator 3.4. School outreach efforts are consistent and include weekly progress updates, phone calls, and regular grade conferences. Once per week, teachers meet with the school’s guidance counselor, an assistant principal or principal, and attendance teacher to discuss students who have missed 5 or more days of school. Despite these systems, PS 398K has 51 % of its student body with 20 or more days of absence. Since our most recent QR, we have worked diligently to align assessments to curricula, use on-going assessment and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels and to ensure that students feel challenged by their peers Across classrooms, teachers work to plan lessons that are appropriately scaffolded to meet the needs of all students Based on a review of our most recent data, we have identified the following school level needs: ● Our school community has a population with 44% of the students residing in Temporary Housing and 33% of the students receiving Special Education Services, including occupational and physical services. The school struggles to purchase technology in order to ensure that our students are prepared to perform in this highly technological world. 9  Because of our transient student population, the school struggles to maintain the number of students that are continuously enrolled. Based upon A closer look at all school level data, we have identified the following priority needs: The school struggles to provide students with resources and academic and extra curricular programs to ensure that all family, student, and community needs are adequately met Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 2% increase in overall student attendance, as compared to our overall student attendance during the 2017-18 school year, as evidenced by ATS. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? There will be a weekly meeting between the principal, assistant principals, guidance counselor, attendance teacher and pupil personnel secretary to review the RCHK, RRSA, RPAL, and RAMO reports to identify students who are at risk of being chronically absent or have fallen into the chronically absent range. Administration and Pupil Support Personnel Teachers Teachers will meet with the guidance counselor, and either an assistant principal or principal to discuss students who are at risk of being chronically absent or have fallen into the chronically absent range. Students living in temporary housing will be assigned a staff member to monitor their attendance and ensure pupil personnel staff are aware of changes in residence and guardianship. Students in living in temporary housing 9/9/2018-6/26/2019 Principal Principal 9/17/2018-6/26/2019 9/17/2018-6/26/2019 Teachers Parents and staff will participate in a school wide committee to develop an application to turn PS 398K into a community school Parents and staff of 398K 10/01/2018-5/30/2019 Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be be invited to participate in monthly celebrations of curriculum where students present their best pieces of work and engage in collaboration with their peers in an environment that is safe and orderly. We will provide support for not only students' cognitive needs, but , " The Whole Child:" Families will be provided with strategies of best practices to extend their growth in these areas such as reading to child 10-15 minutes nightly and having conversation on what was read.... 1  Parent Coordinators, teachers, School Based Support Team , and Community Based Organizations will be key support personnel. Timeline September2018-June 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 10 days for 2 hours per session for afterschool meetings to plan community school application 60 hours of per session for attendance teacher and pupil personnel secretary to hasten the closure of 407s resulting from students moving to permanent residences or to another temporary residence then deciding not to take advantage of their McKinney-Vento rights to remain enrolled at 398K. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 , there will be a 2% decrease in the percentage of students who are chronically absent as demonstrated by the ATS RCHK report when compared to an archived RCHK report from September 2018-January 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure to be used to assess progress; Archived RCHK; Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. *** The strengths is in our collaborative endeavor through looking at students' work, planning next steps ,and implementing action plans by grade level. Based on 2018 , NYS ELA and Math test results , we noticed that on the short and extended responses - students implemented various strategies to extend their responses with relevant text evidence. decoding math word problems, and using various strategies - there was an increase in student performance. Our priority needs includes teachers deepening their understating of formative and summative assessments and utilizing formative assessments to adjust lessons during delivery as well as lesson planning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019 there will be a 75 % increase in the number of teachers employing the use of common, formative ,and summative assessments in the instructional cycle . 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?   Engage in the cycle of analyzing student data and work products and using the findings to create, differentiate and modify instruction for groups of students and individual students. Classroom Teachers  Use of data to monitor student performance. (Administrators, teacher teams and instructional cabinet will:-  Analyze prior state test data, MOSL baseline data and other baseline data to identify the needs of students  Collect and analyze end of unit assessment data and benchmark data to monitor impact, identify the needs of students and adjust strategies and instruction with a focus on the lowest third in each class All students . AIS teachers will provide additional support to the students performing in the lowest 1/3 in the area of writing School’s Lowest 1/3 School Administration, Parent Coordinator, Lead Teachers, Borough Field Office Support Center Literacy Achievement Coaches Assistant Principal, Classroom Teachers , Lead Teachers AIS, ESL, and SPED Teachers Beginning in May2019-June 2019, teachers will meet during Weekly Common Planning Time 45. Minutes – twice per week Tax Levy Professional development Weekly -75 minute Professional Development Days Sept. 2018 -June 2019 Beginning November 2018- June 2019, every Monday-Thursday 7:15am – 7:55 am January 9, 2019 and will 4 end March 30, 2018 AIS Instruction-Sept. 2018-June 2019 Sept. 2018-June 2019 School Administration, Parent Coordinator, Lead Teachers, Borough Field Office Support Center Literacy Achievement Coaches  Coordinating CCLS parent workshops that are facilitated All Parents  by our parent coordinator, administration and outside professional developers. Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress by sharing the common core standards with parents at conferences and at common core parent workshops.  Through School Leadership and PTA Meetings, parents work collaboratively with the School Leadership in planning and making decisions that support the education of their children  Through School Leadership and PTA Meetings, parents work collaboratively with the School Leadership in planning and making decisions that support the education of their children  Partner with the Family and Community Engagement (FACE), Borough Director of the Students in Temporary Housing, Parent Academy Parent Institute, Community –Based Organization (CBO) - Friends of Crown Heights to provide training to parents and staff to support our school community Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format and in languages that parents can understand. Supporting parents through workshops on how to use technology to work with their children at home.   3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families with weekly meetings as per Chancellor's designated Tuesdays with parents. Follow-up phone calls will be made to keep parents in the loop . Monthly newsletter outlining units of study and classroom events. We plan to implement a "Classroom Parent" to bridge the communication among parent , teacher and students. Parents will engage in monthly workshops provided by the school, outside agencies, and the Brooklyn Filed Support Center. Timeline- September 2018-June 2019. 5  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will participate in weekly common planning time twice per week for 45 minutes as a professional periods. Teachers will participate in weekly professional development for 75 minutes Four days per week for 12 weeks of teachers' per session 1 teacher dedicated to providing AIS services Office supplies for newsletters and presentations, 1 staff member serving as parent coordinator, teachers communicating with parents 40 minutes per week Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, a minimum 35 percent of teachers employing the use of common and summative assessment as measured by the most recent MOSL exam results, writing journals ,and on demand writing assignments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure will be the MOSL Scantron exams. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2017-2018 New York State Exam:  23% of students in grade 3 performed on or above grade level  26% of students in grade 4 performed on or above grade level  6% of students in grade 5 performed on or above grade level Based on the data we have identified the following priority needs:    to build fluency across the grades to improve student understanding of how to strategically solve real world problems involving various operations to provide professional development to support the teachers in the implementation of best mathematical practices. Teacher observation data indicates that teachers continue to struggle with aspects of the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) instructional shifts. According to observations teachers need to strengthen content area knowledge, pedagogue, questioning and assessment. The implementation of Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) instruction will support, integrate, and strengthen instruction content areas. The implementation of STEM instruction , students will glean understanding of science concepts and the interconnectedness of the disciplines by :  Asking and answering questions  Analyzing data and drawing conclusions  Understanding and applying organized ways to develop and solve problems Part 2 – Annual Goal 7  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 3% increase in the number of students scoring level 3 and 4 (General Ed, Special Ed, and ELLs) as measured by the New York State Math Assessment. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  All teachers will engaged in professional development and will implement use of writing journals for student to reflect and explain their reasoning and thought process. Align the curriculum to the CCLS cluster strands, scope and sequence, monthly plans: implement common core aligned curriculum; integrate academic language, promote critical thinking through reading, writing and speaking. Teachers will utilize Common Core rubrics Create learning targets for mathematics Use exit slips, math journals and quick checks to monitor student achievement on each target. Classroom Teachers Monitor students’ understanding 9 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom Teachers Beginning September 2018- June 2019, Teachers will meet during Weekly Common Planning Time 45. Minutes – twice per week, Tax Levy Professional development Weekly -75 minute Professional Development Days Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers will meet during Weekly Common Planning Time School Administration, , Lead Teachers, Borough Field Office Support Center Literacy and Mathematics or Science Achievement Coaches School Administration, , Lead Teachers, Borough Field Office Support Center Literacy and Mathematics or Science Achievement Coaches 45. Minutes – twice per week, Tax Levy Professional development Weekly -75 minute Professional Development Days Sept. 2018-June 2019 Sept. 2018-June 2019 All Parents School Administration, Parent Coordinator, Lead Teachers, Borough Field Office Support Center Achievement Coaches Correct misconceptions and scaffold students’ learning Generate interest in the content by designing evidence based debates, making connections to topical issues, field trips and math/science projects Parents will be provided with training and materials to assist them with understanding the new Common Core Learning Standards-Literacy in Math (CCLS ). Information will be shared about the school and parent related programs, meetings and other related activities in a format translated into languages that parents can understand, so that they may best assist their child. To support transparency, monthly newsletters from teachers , monthly calendars from the Parent Coordinator provide information regarding upcoming school and citywide events. Through school leadership and PTA Meetings, parents work collaboratively with school leaders in planning and making decisions that support the education of their children. The school staff will provide training to parents in the use of NYC Schools Account to facilitate the understanding of City, State and Federal standards and assessments. School staff will share information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format translated into languages that parents can understand, so they may best assist their child. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be provided with workshops to address the Chancellor's Framework for Great Schools to explain that best practices for great schools require a partnership between the school and the home in order to foster professional learning communities, strong family -community ties, and trust. Parents will be invited to the monthly School Leadership Team meetings and encouraged to participate in Parent School Leadership roles to support students. Timeline- September 2018-June 2019 0  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will participate in weekly common planning time twice per week for 45 minutes as a professional periods. Teachers will participate in weekly professional development for 75 minutes Office supplies for newsletters and presentations, 1 staff member serving as parent coordinator, teachers communicating with parents 40 minutes per week Resources for the ‘hands on’ science experiments include use of Foss Science Kits; non-fiction trade books; Subscription Services that allow unlimited and premium streaming services such as – National Geographic Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 , fifty percent of the teachers will have implemented looking at student work via ; Inquiry   Classroom walk throughs  Curriculum maps aligned to the CCLS  Running Records  Lesson observations through the lens of the Danielson Framework  Math pre/ post , and interim assessment data   Writing journals and on demand problems Science hands- on projects We will continue to implement the plan and adjust /modify as needed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1   NYC DOE benchmark assessment  On demand math prompts  Tasks created by teacher teams  Math journals  Math/ Science unit assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At P.S 398K, there is a strong culture for learning which results in a unified set of high expectations for both students and staff. We provide programs to facilitate academic growth to our subgroups (ELL's SWD's, African American Males). After careful observation of the Item Skills Analysis from the New York State ELA and Math, exam , it was determined that there was a decrease in the performance of our school's English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities and African - American male students. While our school supports all subgroups with AIS, we understand that more attention must be directed to our subgroups. The priority needs of the school is to provide direct instruction to the students who demonstrated low performance on the ELA and Math exams. After analyzing the NYS Math data , the key areas of focus for grades three -five are ;  multiplication and division of whole numbers fractions- concepts, skills and problem solving  The required fluency for each grade varies and will be highlighted instructionally across the grades After analyzing the NYS ELA data , the key areas of focus for grades three-five are;  Ask and answer questions demonstrate understanding of a text referring explicitly to the text as the basis for the answer  Refer to details and examples in a text when explaining what the text says explicitly and when drawing inferences from the text  Write informative/explanatory text to examine a topic and convey ideas clearly After analyzing the NYSEALAT data, the key areas of focus are;  Writing and vocabulary development Part 2 – Annual Goal 3  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase of twenty- five percent of parent participation at educational events geared towards improving parents’ knowledge, skills and ability to partner with the school. This will be measured by attendance logs at ; school-wide events, parent monthly workshops, and PTA meetings. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1) Maintain the channels of communication through various modalities Parents ● Continued use of phone, newsletter, posters and calendars to reach parents with information about their children and about upcoming events. ● Continued announcements during the Parent Teacher Association Meetings and School Leadership Team Meetings ● Continued use of Parent Coordinator to reach out to parents before school events August 2018-June 2019 School Administration, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Classroom Teachers ● Provide parents reasonable access to staff Maintain structures for parental involvement in decision making SLT, PTA • Use the SLT structure to foster a true partnership in decision making October 2018-May 2019 Principal, Superintendent’s Parent Engagement Officer • Consistently review data with the SLT and PTA • Provide support to members of the SLT and PTA in understanding city and state reports • Provide support to members of the SLT and PTA on the school’s instructional focus Increase parent confidence as academic partners All Parents • Provide academic workshops • Provide information on scope and sequence, standards, assignments/homework, grading policy and academic resources through meetings and on the school’s website • Parent Coordinator of the school works collaboratively with Community Based Organizations and private agencies to provide Sept. 2018-June 2019 School Administration, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Classroom Teachers 5 monthly workshops for parents. Many of the workshops are conducted on 6-8 week cycles. Professional Development will be given on the following topics: • Nutrition workshops – eight week cycle with Cornell University • Financial Workshops – eight week cycles • Special Education Support groups • ESL workshop- meet and greets • Parents as Partners in Reading program • Parent Community Support groups • Learning leaders Volunteers • Emergency Preparedness/CPR 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Friends of Crown Heights, Studio in a School, After School Reading Club (ARC), Parent Cops ( NYU) , SMART Program, Sista to Sista, Foster Grand parents, Cornell-Nutrition Program, OACE ( GED, ESL - Day and Evening Classes),67th Pct. , Cookshop - Food Bank, Optical Academy.com. , Kits for Kidz, Mammogram Mobile Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Employment of Parent Coordinator Partnership with CBOs to train parents 40 hours of per session for teachers and guidance counselors to plan and facilitate 10 monthly workshops for parents 10 SLT stipends for parent and staff members Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 6  By February 2019, the following targets apply for all three strategies enumerated above      Increased attendance at Parent Teacher Association by 10 % as compared to last year Increased attendance to 10 % of the parent workshops by 10 % as compared to last year Increased parent teacher communication by 10% as evidenced by logs Increased attendance in parent engagement activities by 10% as evidenced by Parent Coordinator Report Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument used to measure and assess progress will be the attendance rosters of meetings, and parent feedback . Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) AIS is provided to all students by classroom teachers 2x per week, 2:30p.m.- 3:30 p.m. Small group instruction is provide by AIS teachers throughout the school day to all level 1 students. AIS cluster teachers provide an additional period of instruction to all classes weekly. AIS is provided to all students by classroom teachers 2x per week, 2:30p.m.- 3:30 p.m. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Services will be provided before, during, and after the school day. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Wilson, Fundations; guided AIS instruction will be delivered in reading, writing mechanics, and content small group instruction by teachers pushing into classrooms as well as teachers providing small group instruction during the extended day schedule. re-teaching of math AIS instruction will be delivered in concepts, use of manipulatives games, drills, and problem small group instruction by teachers Services will be provided before, during, and after the school day. 8  Small group solving. instruction is provide by AIS teachers throughout the school day to all level 1 students. AIS cluster teachers provide an additional period of instruction to all classes weekly. AIS teachers provide literacy instruction to all students achieving levels 1 and 2 on the 2017NYS 4 th grade Science Assessment. AIS teachers provide literacy instruction to all students achieving a level 1 on the 2017NYS ELA assessment. Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Using an inquiry based approach to focus on concepts development Writing samples – responses on exit slips, reports, etc. Focus in content area reading to support comprehension of non-fiction texts Sessions include: small group. pushing into classrooms as well as teachers providing small group instruction during the extended day schedule Three 45 minutes sessions per week. Services will provide during the Preparation for the school day. fourth grade NYS Test in May 2018. Three 45 minutes sessions per week. Services will provide during the school day. Sessions take place 2 xs per week. All services provided during the Individual counseling sessions, and classroom guidance lessons school day 9  provided to assist at-risk students. 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 136 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The services provided to the Students in temporary housings will consist of two after school programs. One program will provide students with services for a twelve month period. Students will provided with: School supplies toiletries counseling art therapy  uniforms,  backpacks  under clothing    breakfast in classroom    monthly celebrations for parents and students  new warm coats  hats and gloves   outside learning experience (trips)  Brooklyn Public Library Partnership (Kids mobile)  hot supper  holiday baskets  holiday toys  eyeglasses    free vision screening free dental screening caring and nurturing environment clothing (adults, children) Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 1 N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. Book bags, Uniforms, School supplies, educational trips, Recreational activities, provide personal items as needled, 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. PS 398 attracts highly qualified teachers by our rigorous interview protocols: ● PS 398 hiring committee discusses interview questions and demo lessons prior to interviews ● Open Market search for candidates ● Candidates meet with Hiring Committee (staff and administrators) ● Candidates teacher a demonstration lesson with children from PS 398 ● The pupil personnel secretary will work closely with the network Human Resource executive to ensure that ● non-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. ● Attendance at recruitment fairs and Open House Fairs for New Teacher PS 398 retains and nurtures teachers by: ● Providing numerous common planning periods with grade-level colleagues ● First year mentoring program. PS 398 provides second year mentoring when needed ● Formal observations by supervisors with feedback ● Professional development opportunities include Election Day and Brooklyn-Queens Day PD, monthly grade ● conferences, monthly faculty conferences, weekly Inquiry Team meetings, and DOE workshops PS 398 differentiates professional development through: 3  ● Collaboration with local universities and colleges; Brooklyn College and Long Island University- Student ● teachers and observers participate in the teaching and learning of NYCDOEs practice 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). In addition to being fully certified and licensed in their assigned areas, current staff will become highly qualified through participation in on-site professional development activities, such as grade meetings, and study groups, and off-site trainings, Common Core Fellowship, and NYCDOE workshops. Participants will then facilitate peer sessions to “turn- key” the information and knowledge gleaned in teacher led teams. Additionally, in weekly grade meetings led by supervisors, coaches or grade leaders, teachers engage in instructional planning and data analyses of students’ artifacts such as class work, benchmark folders and periodic assessments. Through the process of teacher teams, each individual will have ample opportunities to hone his or her inquiry skills. In addition to the menu of professional development opportunities previously mentioned, in an effort to build capacity and establish leaders at the various levels of the school, staff members are also encouraged to continue their educational pursuit as their needs dictate, such as graduate, post-graduate degrees and certification in areas of interest. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). T/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 4  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Students from preschool are registered in the school based on their school pick for Kindergarten. Parents are supported through the registration process by the pupil accounting secretary, the ESL teacher and the parent coordinator. Parents are given an information packet to direct them to where they need to go for support. The school offers parent tours for parents and their students who are transitioning into the elementary school. The current pre-k curriculum in the school is well aligned with the common core curriculum being taught in the elementary school. Early childhood teachers have an opportunity to familiarize themselves with the upcoming grades’ academic expectations. Likewise, they also participate in weekly grade-alike meetings or teacher team meetings where they look at artifacts generated by students on their respective grades. They engage in data analyses to determine strengths and weakness as well as the adjustments deemed necessary to the instructional units. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers participated on the Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) Selection Team to determine assessments, which would be utilized. Additionally, teachers have an opportunity to participate in designing internal school assessments such as Performance Based Assessments (PBA) and end-of-unit assessments as well as class assignments and tasks which assess students’ performance and achievement. Teachers participate in weekly grade-alike meetings or teacher team meetings where they look at artifacts generated by students on their respective grades. They engage in data analyses to determine strengths and weakness as well as the adjustments deemed necessary to the instructional units. In tandem, they participate in two professional development led by the school’s principal with the collective staff from Grades Pre-k through 5. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6,7 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 322,330.00 5  Title II, Part A Federal 161,635.00 Title III, Part A Federal 11,200.00 Title III, Immigrant Federal 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2,195,221.00 X X X 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6, 7 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 6,7 5A, 5B,5C, 5D, 5E, 6,7 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6, 7 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program. 6   Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 17K398, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 17K398 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;   ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children;   ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;   ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;   ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  8   ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;   ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;   ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact;   ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;   ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.;   ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;   ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 9    ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions;   ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;   ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;   ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;   ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee;   ● supporting or hosting Family Day events;   ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;   ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;   ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;   ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;   ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 17K398, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 0  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by:  ● using academic learning time efficiently;   ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences;   ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;   ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas;   ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:  ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related;   ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved;   ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting;   ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;   ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand;   ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  1  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;   ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member;   ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;   ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents  ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians;   ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend);   ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community;   ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy;   ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;   ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary;     ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes);   ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;   ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time;  ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;   ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;   ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district;   ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible;   ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams;   ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities  ● attend school regularly and arrive on time;  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time;  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions;  ● show respect for myself, other people and property;  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully;  ● always try my best to learn. 3  4 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm 2. 3. Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: The Walter Weaver This school is (check one): DBN: 17K398 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 33 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 1 2 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: Part B P.S. 398’s student population is being transformed by a steady increase in the number of English Language Learners (ELLs). The majority of our students originate from low-income immigrant families ranging from Haitians, Mexicans, Puerto Ricans, Dominicans, and Africans. These traits of the community create the needs for an ELL program to help the students maintain their home language, i.e.: Haitian Creole, French, Spanish, Hausa, and other African dialects, while they are acquiring English as a new language (ENL). To address the needs of our increasing ELL population, Title III supplementary program will focus on ELLs in grades 2, 3, 4 and 5. There are approximately 3 second graders, 5 third graders, 7 fourth graders, and 10 fifth graders. First of all, the school will create a before school Title III Enrichment program for ELLs which will commence in January and end in May. The curriculum of the program will be aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. The focus will be to support students as they learn content and the English language simultaneously. We will help students develop English language proficiency in all content areas and make yearly academic gains. Students will be engage in on-going listening, speaking, reading and writing activities that will provide the foundation for language development. A researched-based program that we are planning to utilize is Imagine Learning—Language & Literacy, which will be purchased with Title III funds. With Imagine Language & Literacy, every student receives explicit, targeted instruction within an individualized learning path that continually adjusts to their needs. With over 4,300 engaging activities, the program teaches critical language and literacy concepts such as reading and listening comprehension, basic vocabulary, academic language, grammar, phonological awareness, phonics, and fluency. The program is differentiated, standards-aligned, rigorous, and effective. The ENL and the content area teachers will implement a co-teaching model. Both the ENL and the content area teachers will co-plan, co-deliver, and individualize instruction for all students. They will work together to accommodate the language proficiencies, cultural diversity and educational backgrounds of our ELLs. Teachers will create and implement a multi-sensory approach to learning with the use of technology to engage students. Academic support will include but not limited to the Empire State NYSESLAT, which would be purchased as an additional source. The text units are designed to familiarize students with the structure of the exam as well as the questions in the speaking, listening, reading and writing sections of the NYSESLAT. In addition, each unit focuses on comprehension skills needed to transition to the New York State ELA test. The questions in the Empire State NYSESLAT parallel those found on the NYSESLAT multiple-choice and short and extended written responses. Students are exposed to informational, literary, and functional passages—the same genres found on the NYSESLAT. 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The morning academy program will begin in January 7, 2019 and will end April 25, 2019. This will consist of 57 morning sessions. Sessions will be held on Mondays-Thursdays (4 times a week) from 7:15am to 7:45am. Approximately 25 students will be serviced in the program. The students will be placed in 2 groups with the ENL teacher co-teaching alongside a content area teacher. The students will be grouped as follows: Mondays and Tuesdays: Entering and Emerging Students (Group A) Wednesday and Thursdays: Transitioning and Expanding Students (Group B) The ENL teacher will spend two days co-teaching with group A (Monday and Tuesday) and two days co-teaching with group B (Wednesday and Thursday). Teachers will deliver lessons using the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP Model). Students will research themes and topics on current events for class debates in order to improve listening, speaking, reading and writing modalities. Our instructional model is to use English and students’ home language to improved academic and social language skills. The materials we will use include: Easy English News and Language Power. We will also be using web-based programs such as BrainPOP ELL, Imagine Learning: Language & Literacy and Flocabulary. Part C After analyzing instructional and assessment data and feedback from teachers we came to the conclusion that our staff would benefit from professional development that focuses on meeting the linguistic needs of our ELLs in the classroom. The Title III Professional Development sessions will engage classroom teachers of 2nd-5th grade in a variety of strategies gear to meet the individual needs of students. Our professional development component will include PDs facilitated by the ENL teacher. Our professional development component will include weekly articulation between the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher; and monthly PDs on Mondays. The PDs will begin in January and continue through April (a total of 4 PDs). The following topics will be covered during these sessions: January 8th, 2019: Designing and Planning Common Core Aligned Instruction for ELLs Including those with Special Needs Presenter: ENL Teacher—Ms. Tan 2:30-3:15pm February 5th, 2019: Best Practices for Implementing Co-Teaching Models for ELLs Presenter: ENL Teacher—Ms. Tan 2:30-3:15pm March 5, 2019: Utilizing materials and instructional resources aligned to the CCLS to support ELL students. Presenter: ENL Teacher—Ms. Tan 2:30-3:15pm April 2, 2019: Formative and Summative Assessments: NYC Periodic Assessments, Baseline and Benchmark to measure ELLs progress. Presenter: ENL Teacher—Ms. Tan 2:30-3:15pm Part D Parental support is critical to student success, therefore we strive to strengthen the home-school relationship by increasing participation in school activities and make parents partners in the educational process. To achieve these goals, the parents are invited to an End-of-Program celebration to observe and commemorate their child/ren success. Parents are sent invitations created by the students and their teachers (translated versions will be available). This activity will take place in May 2019. In addition, the following is a list of workshop that will be provided: February 13, 2019: NYS ELA Test Preparation for Parents of ELLs Presenter: Ms. Devot February 27, 2019: NYS ELA Test Preparation for Parents of ELLs Presenter: Ms. Devot 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information March 6, 2019: How to Assist Your Child with the NYSESLAT Presenter: Ms. Tan, ENL Teacher These workshops will benefit parents by informing them of grade level expectations, as well as provide an avenue through which parents can become more involved in their children’s education. The workshop will take place during the day and each workshop will last an hour and a half. Interpretations will be provided. Notices will be sent home to parents in their preferred languages. Other parent engagement activities include: · · · In addition, parents will receive training and information on public resources that are available in the community including free workshops, multicultural and audio-visual programs designed to help parents of ELLs in the language acquisition process and the steps involved in career and college readiness. Homework help for parents Opportunities for parents to share their expertise Multicultural Day Celebration rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: After analyzing our data, we determined that our staff needs professional development for integrating the needs of our ELLs into the CCLS. The Title III Professional Development Program will engage Title III program teachers and 2nd - 5th grade classroom teachers in a variety of high quality professional development activities. Our professional development component will include PDs given by the ESL network leader, data specialist and the ESL teacher. The PDs will be given during their common preparation period once per month beginning in January and continuing through May (total of 5). The teachers in the Title III Program will participate in a Study group for five sessions using Collaboration and Co Teaching: Strategies for English Learners by Andrea Honigsfeld, from : February 2nd 2015 , to March 9th 2015 on the following dates: February 2, 9, 23, March 2, 9 , 2015. The study group will consist of one ESL teacher, two general education teachers , and one special education teacher. After analyzing our data, we determined that our staff needs professional development for integrating the needs of our ELLs into the CCLS. The Title III Professional Development Program will engage Title III program teachers and 2nd - 5th grade classroom teachers in a variety of high quality professional development activities. Our professional development component will include PDs given by the ESL network leader, data specialist and the ESL teacher. The PDs will be given during their common preparation period once per month beginning in January and continuing through May (total of 5). The teachers in the Title III Program will participate in a Study group for five sessions using Collaboration and Co Teaching: Strategies for English Learners by Andrea Honigsfeld, from : February 2nd 2015 , to March 9th 2015 on the following dates: February 2, 9, 23, March 2, 9 , 8  Part C: Professional Development 2015. The study group will consist of one ESL teacher, two general education teachers, and one special education teacher. The following topics will be covered during these sessions: January 9 th , 2015 Designing and planning common core aligned instruction ,for ELLs including those with special needs Presenter- Network Support- Camilla Holmes 9:00 am- 10:30am February 6th, 2015 Best Practices for implementing Co-Teaching model for ELLs-9:00 am-10:30am Presenter- Network Support- Camilla Holmes, Felicha Daley March 6th , 2015 Utilizing materials and instructional resources aligned to the CCLs to support ELL students Presenter- Dr. Joann Benoit-9:00 am-10:30am April 17th, 2015 Formative and Summative assessments to measure ELLs progress and provide feedback Presenter - Karen Brown – Data Specialist 9:00-10:30am May 1st, 2015 Reflective Practices for Teachers supporting ELLs in all content areas and adjustments made to meet the needs of the students. Presenter- Ava Brown- 9:00am-10:30am Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities 9  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities PS398K will offer and provide a parental participation component for LEP/ELL parents. Parental support is critical to student success, therefore we strive to strengthen the home-school relationship by increasing participation in school activities and make parents partners in the educational process. To achieve these goals,the parents are invited to End-of-Program celebration to observe and commemorate their child/ren success. Parents are sent invitations created by the students and their teachers (translated versions will be available) . This activity will take place May 15th, 2015. Workshop Timeline: September 12th , 2014@ 6:00 p.m. 7:00 p.m. - Curriculum Night Presenter: PS398 Staff and Administration February 6th , 2015 @ 10:00 a.m. -11:30 a.m. NYS Math Test Preparation for Parents of ELLs Presenter: ( Ruth Broughton , Content Specialist) February 13th , 2015@10:00 a.m- 11:30 a.m.- NYS ELA Test Preparation for students of ELLs - Presenter:( Ruth Broughton, Content Specialist ) March 6th , 2015 @ 10:00-a.m. 11:30 a.m. How to Assist Your Child with NYSESLAT Presenters: ( Karen Brown, Data Specialist; J. Pinette, ESL Teacher) May 22 , 2015 @ 10:00 a.m.- 1:30 p.m. -Family Day Parent engagement activities will also include three training sessions, September 16th 2014, ELL Family Orientation, meet the teacher , meeting the service providers, language translators, classroom teachers and staff personnel . The purpose of this training is to make parents familiar with the program. Three training sessions, will be offered: one at the end of January , one at the beginning of February, and the third in March. This training will benefit parents by informing them of grade level expectations, as well as provide an avenue through which parents can become more involved in their children's education. It will be provided by the ESL teacher and teachers, who are proficient in the program. The training will take place before school and during school for one and a half hours. Interpretation will be provided. Notices about these training sessions will be sent home to parents in their preferred languages. Parent involvement activities for the parents of the ELL students will consist of the following activities; ~Foreign Language Night ~Parent involvement night concurrent with a dance or other social event (Parents come and students get in free) ~Opportunities for parents to share their expertise ~Homework help for parents ~Workshops for parents * Test taking and study skills of work taught at school to students so that the same procedures are reinforced at home - Four sessions, March 3, 10 17 and 24, 2015. We will ensure parental involvement by providing a series of workshops to be conducted by a facilitator who speaks the parents’ native language(s). He/she will share materials and resources to use when assisting children with their homework. In addition, parents will receive training and information on public resources that are available in the community including free workshops, multicultural and audio visual programs designed to help parents of English Learners in the language acquisition process, and the steps involved in career and college radiness. 0 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 17 School Name Walter Weaver Elementary School Borough Brooklyn School Number 398 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Tammy Katan Brown Assistant Principal Ava Brown Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Chun Ha Tan Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Sharon Palmer Superintendent Mr. Clarence Ellis Coach School Counselor Parent Parent Coordinator Mona Lucas Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 303 2 Total number of ELLs 37 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.21%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 3 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? NYSITELL, Fountas, and Pinnell Running Records and teacher - created assessments. the data provides the students word knowledge;phonemic awareness and comprehension of text. The data gathered from these assessments allow us to identify our ELLs area of strength and weakness. we ae able to use the data for lesson planning and addressing students' needs. The ESL teacher in collaboration with the classroom teachers are able to use the gathered data to differentiate instruction and organize flexible groupings. Grouping for instruction is based on mixed proficiency levels or heterogeneous grouping. All instruction is age and grade appropriate and follow children First reforms that focus on strengthen ENL program model so that they are academically challenging. ESL/ENL instruction is also aligned with the NYSED New Language Arts Progression (NLAP) aligned to the Common Core Learning Standard in every grade. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? P.S. 398 Evaluates the success of our ELL program by assessment and data. All of our teachers receive the NYSESLAT scores of all ELL students. An analysis of this data is important for the teachers to focus specifically on our ELL students needs. Examining that NYSESLAT scores assist our teachers in developing plans and differentiate the instructional process. At the beginning of the school year P.S. 398 develops a curriculum unit in all subject area which have a focus on the four modalities of Listening, Speaking Reading and Writing instruction to enable ELL students to advance on the NYSESLAT and ELA state Exams. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] P.S. 398 uses periodical assessment and data is used to guide instruction for within the RTI framework. We incorporate high quality evidence based instruction for students into Tiered groups (1,2 and 3). This includes instruction that has demonstrated effectiveness for Ells and differentiation to meet the students' diverse needs. When our Ells demonstrate progress there is a need for more target and intensive academic support. The classroom teacher provides small group instruction using the core curriculum. The ESL teacher uses a researched - based program to provide instruction specifically for addressing the needs of the ELL students. A minimum of 50% of the required professional development hours for all teachers as prescribed by CR Pare 154 is dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on Best Practices for team teaching strategies for ELLS. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Analysis of NYSITELL and NYSESLAT data patterns across proficiency levels, data patterns results revealing that the students' English language proficiency is limited in reading and writing models due to the fact that 45% of our ELLs are beginners and 32% are intermediates and 23% are of our students are advanced. Our past data has revealed that our ELLs scored higher on the modalities of Listening, /Speaking rather than in Reading and Writing. This is consistent with language learners theories. The data also revealed that 30% of long term ELLs scored at the Expanding level of language fluency in the NYSESLAT. They have been able to acquire the verbal skills needed for English fluency:however, they are lacking the comprehension and reading skills needed to achieve proficiency levels. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our freestanding/standalone ENL program is implemented through the push -in pull out models where students are regularly grouped homogeneously, Pursuant to the CR Part 154.2 regulations, they receive services three days a week according to their individual levels in Entering, Emerging, Transiting, Expanding, and Commanding levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A 4  c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In our school, P.S. 398; the ENL Freestanding/ standalone program includes 2 instructional components of language arts instruction: English Language Arts (ELA) and English as a New Language (ENL). ELA instruction is provided by the content area teachers. The ESL/ENL component is provided by the ESL/ENL teacher. The instructional program provides classes for student stat the levels of language progressions Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, /Expanding, and Commanding levels of English language competency and literacy proficiency. Students at the Entering and Emerging receive ESL/ENL instruction for a total of 360 minutes or eight (8) mandated periods of ESL/ENL instruction per week, while the students at the Transitioning level receive 180 minutes of ESL/ENL instruction, and Commanding level students receive 90 minutes of push - in services as mandated by CR-Part 154. The ESL teacher, holding an appropriate license for teaching English to Speakers of other Languages, provides language instruction in English. As per CR-Part 154 content area instruction and ELA classes are delivered in English,. . P.S.398 reviews the NYSESLAT scores were we program the ELL student in specific groups in order for them to receive the mandated amount of instruction outlined in CR Part 154 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Using date - driven instruction the ESL teacher uses Common core aligned instruction along with graphic organizers, relia, and strategies including STOP, Modeling, TRP, Student - Questioning, and Self - Assessments to deliver and reinforce classroom instruction in all content areas. Language learning competency is based on academic content that is specific to each academic discipline where students are treated as historians and scientist,. Consequently, ELLs are expected to work at the same level as all other students in the school. Curriculum option are the same for ELLs and Non-ELLs. The teachers use QTEL strategies that are most applicable to the curriculum being taught. The ESL/ENL teacher helps identify the strategies that are most appropriate for the concept being taught. P.S.398 teachers also use data to monitor Ell performance. In particular, they monitor ARIS to analyze NYSESLAT and ELA scores to identify when ELLS have improved. After examining the data, teachers try to figure out the achievement gaps and identify the specific actions that can help the students achieve most in these areas during class or after school. Content area instruction and ELA classes are delivered in English to students, who enter the New York City school system, with limited English - speaking abilities. They are faced with the challenges of learning to read, write, speak and understand a new language while at the same time mastering grade - level content. Mainstream content teachers use ESL methodologies during some instructional time mastering grade level content knowledge. Small flexible grouping is in place to address the needs of all ELL subgroups. To help students progress in the ELL program we utilize the following practices of scaffolding modeling, bridging, schema building, contextualization, text representation and mega cognition. Also the ESL teacher uses words in the ELL student's native language to assist in vocabulary building on a one on one basis in the student's writing book. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The school ensures that all ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native home language by subscribing to the testing accommodation mandates; students evaluations in their native language solely applies to translated versions of the New York State Mathematics and Science test. Students are given dictionaries and other books as supplementary readers in their native languages to keep them up to date through out the year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. Long Term 5  e. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Plan for SIFE students: After students with interrupted Formal Education are identified, the ELL teacher designs, units/lesson plans to address student's basic needs. Differentiated instruction is provided for all ELLs by all content area teachers. When SIFE students are identified they are given extra support at our school particularly through push in/ pull out services. b. Newcomers received differential instruction as they are grouped on the basis of educational needs. Those needs are aggressively targeted and addressed through academic intervention and ESL instruction. c. Plans for long term ELLs include:Extended Day literacy and mathematics; After school programs, and extra Curricular activities. Our school differentiates instruction for all ELL student's who have been in the program for more than four years as follows; Based on the data collected from formative assessment, Dibbles, Running Records, classroom portfolios and one on one student conferences, students are grouped and instructions are designed to meet their needs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ESL/ENL teacher uses the goals stated in the IEP to address the specific needs of the ELL-SWDs; using such strategies as small group instruction, multi sensory material and graphic organizers for instruction. All grades implement the Common Core programs, Ready, GEN, Mathematics, and Foundation for Phonics. Additionally, all grades utilize the P.S.398 curriculum maps to provide instructions. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The instructional strategy that the school utilizes is differentiated instruction based n data as well as the goals stated on the ELL - SWD IEP. The ESL/ENL teacher provides additional comprehensible input and use of relia to facilitate comprehension and English proficiency. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our intervention program for ELLs include after - school and Saturday Academics in ELA and Math, various social and academic clubs to students' interest, AIS reading and writing intervention by several of our teacher's and all mandated specialized services such as speech and SETTS. Ours ELL students receive AIS intervention in the subjects of Social and Science. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? All ELLs are offered and encouraged to participate in after school and Saturday academics in ELA and Math. They are also encouraged to participate in various social and academic clubs according to their interest and in various AIS reading and writing interventions provided by several of our teachers. SWD ELLs who also receive all mandated specialized services such as speech and SETTS. We have programs in after for all students including ELLs. They have the opportunity to participate in the specific literacy programs used as consolidation for their language development. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The bilingual program here was never closed. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELL students are provided with equal access to all the programs at P.S. 398. All ELLs and their parents are notified offered and encouraged to take advantage of all the after-school programs and Saturday academics that we offer. In addition, they are encouraged to participate in the local library , many programs as well as other community activities that exist near our school. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All of the classrooms in P.S.398 are equipped with smart boards for in- depth instruction and computers for students work in addition, there is a large, modern, well- functioning computer lab, where technology instruction is given to all students 6  including the ELLs. The instructional materials used for our ELLs are our curriculum units that include the four modalities for our ELL student's. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered in our Freestanding ESL/ENL model. Flexible use of student's home language is permitted and encouraged in all classrooms in the first stage of language learning which are the Entering and Emerging stages, regardless of their grade levels. ELLs use their home language in order to access the content. Student's at the transitioning stage can make use of their home language when they have a need to. The ESL/ENL and content area teachers use bilingual books and references, dictionaries, and other books on tape. Multi - lingual glossaries are offered to the other core subject teachers. The peer buddy system in and out of class is especially strong among our ELLs too. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All services, materials, lessons, and peer- pairing correspond strictly to the age, grade and social levels, and culture of our ELLs. The ESL/ENL teacher meets with the SETTS and classroom teachers during common planning times, obtain feedback on individual strengths and needs of the ELL student's. The ESL teacher is provided with weekly lesson plans of classroom teachers for all grade levels to be able to support and reinforce work done in the classroom. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All of the classrooms in P.S. 398 are equipped in with smart boards for in- depth instruction and computers for students work in addition, there is a large, modern well functioning computer lab, where technology instruction is given to all students, including ELLs. The instructional material used for our curriculum units that include the four modalities for all student's. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newcomers to the school, newly enrolled ELL students are mainly from kindergarten. They are provided with a tour of the school and their parents are told of the programs that are available within the school community. The students are grouped with other students as buddy pairs who share the same culture and language background where it is inputted into the NYCDOE school system. The school councilor, parent coordinator, ENL teacher and other professionals, are around to meet the students and their parents and help to introduce some of the activities prepared for them. Their print rich ELL classroom, the computer and the dance room where most of activities are planned for newly enrolled ELLs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We don not offer any language electives for ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 7  The successful implementation of language allocation policy will also depend on staff development, teacher qualification, knowledge of the need of English language learning. The focus of the ESL/ENL professional development is to present research based strategies designed to help LEP/ELL student meet the Common Core Standard. The professional development session would encourage teachers to engage in reflection upon their pedagogical practice. Teachers and school personnel will have an opportunity to share "best practices" and to learn form each other. The staff development session are designed to meet the mandate under Part CR 154. Professional development and certification requirement 15% total hours ELL-PD for all teachers. 50% total hours ELL-Specific PD for bilingual and ENL/ESL teachers. At the beginning of the school year P.S. 398 provide professional development for all staff members which includes all teachers speech therapists, occupational/physical therapist, guidance councilor, para professional, aids and secretaries regarding differentiated instruction, planning for differentiated classroom and strategies for ELL students development success. All teachers who provide services to ELL/LEP students and other school personnel including para professionals are encouraged to participate in high quality professional development (PD) Workshop that are need driven and research based. Our ESL teacher attends professional development workshop regularly and make turnkey presentation to the other members of the staff. This year we are concentrating on Danielson's enhancing professional study that meets weekly. Other PD teachers are encouraged to participate in PD that provide information on how to identify and address the academic needs that may affect ELL student's performance. The training will explore the impact of second language acquisition, lack of quality prior instruction, social economic status, and students with interrupted formal education. The workshop will provide an evidence based approach to appropriate school based services before, or instead of referring for a disability evaluation. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. On scheduled professioanl development days, all teachers and para professionals receive training in ELS/ENL strategies and discuss practical ways of helping our ELL learners. The ESL teacher provides 8 sessions of 50 minutes per week for Entering/Emerging students, 180 minutes for intermediates and 90 minutes for commanding/advanced. Teachers are engaged in activities that help awareness and sensitivity of all ELL students needs aligned with the Common Core Learning standard. If any of our new teachers do not have this training when they come to P.S. 398, they are sent to professional development workshops that focus on cultural sensitivity and diversity, ESL standard, ESL teaching techniques, use of manipulative and kinesthetic activities, pedagogic use of body language and facial expressions, modeling, use of a variety of visuals, key vocabulary teaching, and how to create a lingual rich atmosphere in the ESL/ENL classroom. Proof of attendance at this training is kept by each teacher as well as in the individual teachers file in the office of the school. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At our parent orientation meeting, the ESL teacher and our Parent Coordinator inform the parents about the program and activities that are available at our school and community. These programs include ESL and GED classes; Parent workshops such as nutrition; parent leaders, literacy and math workshops. Parents are informed of program goals, their child's language development needs in all content areas. Such meetings are conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent of guardian best understands. Individual parent meetings are conducted in accordance with collective bargaining agreements. Record of attendance are file using existing procedures. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our school encourages parents and community participation by notifying parents about meetings, workshops and special events via letters sent home, telephone calls, and fliers hung around the school. All the material are written in English and 8  Spanish, as well as the home language of each child. There are translators available at meeting or workshop and many key speakers are community based personnel who are bilingual. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Tammy Katan Brown, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Walter Weaver Elementary Schoo School DBN: 17K398 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Tammy Katan Brown Title Principal Ava Brown Mona Lucas Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Doreen Headley ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jacqueline Crichlow Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Jemma Byam School Counselor Ellis Clarence Ms Mckenzie Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/10/17 10/10/17 10/10/17 10/10/17 10/10/17 10/10/17 10/10/17 10/10/17 10/10/17 10/10/17 10/10/17 10/10/171/1/01 10/10/17 10/10/17 10/10/17 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 17K398 School Name: WALTER WEAVER Superintendent: Clarence Ellis The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No ENL Coordinator/ENL Teacher No Yes Chun Ha Tan * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parents of students who speak, and who express a preference for communication in a language other than English, are given the opportunity to watch the video provided by the Department of Education for initial parent orientation in their language of preference. They also receive instruction and guidance on how to directly access information from the New York City Department of Education's website from any computer in their native language(s). Additionally, data we collected from the Home Language Identification Surveys (HLIS), ATS, and the Blue cards during the initial interview is later revised and used to ensure they receive all written information from the school in their native language; and they are provided an interpreter for oral communication at the school during conferences. Pertinent information on how to use technological tools such as Google translate and Parents' Help line when assisting students in their homework is ultimately provided during Parents' workshops and trainings. 2  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish Haitian Creole Arabic French English Oneida 13 10 6 1 226 0 5.08 3.91 2.34 0.39 88.28 0 13 11 6 1 223 2 5.08 4.3 2.34 0.39 87.11 0.78 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Haitian Creole, Spanish, and Arabic Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families September 2018 through June 2019 General overview of student curriculum, letters from the school leadership team. New York State Testing Date (NYSAA, ELA, Math & Science) Notice Monday, March 11 – Friday, June 7 2019 How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We plan to translate using staff members who speak our students/parents' home language. We will also utilize the NYCDOE translation services. Notices will be sent home in the child's home language and phone calls will be made if necessary in the child's home language. We plan to translate using staff members who speak our students/parents' home language. We will also utilize the NYCDOE translation services. Notices will be sent home in 3  Tuesday, April 2 – Thursday, April 4 2019 the child's home language and phone calls will be made if necessary in the child's home language. Wednesday, May 1 – Friday, May 3 2019 Monday, April 8 – Friday, May 17 2019 Monday, May 6 – Friday, May 17 Wednesday, May 22 – Friday, May 31 Monday, June 3 September 17, 2018 November 14, 2018 Parent-Teacher Conference Notice March 13, 2019 May 15, 2019 Newsletters, September 5th, 2018- June 1, 2019 announcements We plan to translate using staff members who speak our students/parents' home language. We will also utilize the NYCDOE translation services. Notices will be sent home in the child's home language and phone calls will be made if necessary in the child's home language. We plan to translate using staff members who speak our students/parents' home language. We will also utilize the NYCDOE translation services. Notices will be sent home in the child's home language and phone calls will be made if necessary in the child's home language. 4  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Every Tuesday starting October 1, 2018 to June 2019. Parents are encouraged to come to the school every Tuesday during our Parent Outreach from 2:30-3:30pm Curriculum Night September 17, 2018 Parent Teacher Conference November 14, 2018 Parent Teacher Conference March 13, 2019 interpretation service(s)? Haitian Creole speaking school staff will be available to make oral translation or via phone calls or during parent visits to the school for meetings or workshops. The Spanish and Arabic families will also be provided with interpretation services using the NYC DOE TI Unit over the phone service. The ENL program will provide parent with workshops on the third Tuesday of November, February and March. Haitian Creole speaking school staff will be available to make oral translation or via phone calls or during parent visits to the school for meetings or workshops. The Spanish and Arabic families will also be provided with interpretation services using the NYC DOE TI Unit over the phone service. The ENL program will provide parent with workshops on the third Tuesday of November, February and March. Haitian Creole speaking school staff will be available to make oral translation or via phone calls or during parent visits to the school for meetings or workshops. The Spanish and Arabic families will also be provided with interpretation services using the NYC DOE TI Unit over the phone service. The ENL program will provide parent with workshops on the third Tuesday of November, February and March. Haitian Creole speaking school staff will be available to make oral translation or via phone calls or during parent visits to the school for meetings or workshops. The Spanish and Arabic families will also be provided with interpretation services using the NYC DOE TI Unit over the phone service. The ENL program will 5  Parent Teacher Conference May 15, 2019 provide parent with workshops on the third Tuesday of November, February and March. Haitian Creole speaking school staff will be available to make oral translation or via phone calls or during parent visits to the school for meetings or workshops. The Spanish and Arabic families will also be provided with interpretation services using the NYC DOE TI Unit over the phone service. The ENL program will provide parent with workshops on the third Tuesday of November, February and March. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, we will reach families that cannot communicate in English via the Remind App which sends a text message to our parents' cell phones in their home languages. In addition, we will also use robocalls to broadcast messages to our families. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulations A-663 by conducting a Professional Development on Mondays during our Staff Professional Development time facilitated by our Language Access Coordinator. At this professional development, staff will learn about the different language access resources available such as the NYC DOE over the phone translation and interpretation services, "I Speak" cards for parents and how to use technological apps such as Google translate and Remind to provide language access to all our families. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school will provide each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who requires language assistance services, with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. A copy of this brochure will be given out during the ELL Parent Orientation 6  where parents of identified ELLs learn about the different ELL programs offered by New York State. Our school will continue to post in conspicuous location at or near the primary entrance of our building a sign in each of the covered language, or most prominent covered languages indicating the availability of interpretation services. In addition, our school's safety plan containing procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school's administrative offices solely due to language barriers. Furthermore, our school will ensure that all parents representing more than 10% of our school community speaking a primary language that is neither English nor a covered language, obtain from the Translation and Interpretation Unit a translation into such language of the signage and forms required. Such forms will be posted and provided accordingly. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In addition to the parent survey, our school will collect feedback and ideas expressed by parents during workshops and during formal and informal conferences to ensure their voices are heard and the needs of their children are met in the best of our ability. 7 
