 17K399 School Name: P.S. 399 STANLEY EUGENE CLARK Principal: LAKEASHA WILLIAMS   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Stanley Eugene Clark Elementary School 331700010399 K-5 School Number (DBN): 17K399 2707 Albermarle Rd. Brooklyn, NY 11226 718-693-3026 Phone Number: 718-940-0702 Fax: Donna Saul DSaul@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Lakeasha Williams Andrea Rawle Sabrina Bennett Deborah Kennedy Judith Eliacin none N/A District Information Geographical District: 17 Clarence Ellis Superintendent: 1224 Park Place, Brooklyn Ny 11213 Superintendent’s Office Address: Cellis3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-221-4372 Phone Number: 718-221-4326 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn South Field Support Center FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Mauriciere DeGovia Executive Director: 415 89th St Brooklyn NY 11209 MDegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4862 Phone Number: 718-630-1634 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) LakeashaWilliams Andrea Rawle Sabrina Bennett Parent n/a Judith Eliacin n/a n/a Oneekha Mack Nell July-Sealy Deborah Kennedy *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Parent Teacher Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Teresa Patterson Paraprofessional Leah Azor RasceneyJoseph Lawana Dunn Mirna Roberts Parent Parent Parent Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of the Stanley Eugene Clark Elementary School, Shine Shine 399 is to achieve academic and social emotional excellence for all children through standards driven differentiated instruction. We provide a safe and nurturing environment in collaboration with the families and our community. We ae dedicated to the development of civic, social, and higher order thinking skills necessary for College and Career Readiness and life-long productivity.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 399 is located in the Flatbush community of Brooklyn. Our school is an open classroom concept- A school without walls. We currently serve 340 students in grades K-5. Our English as a New Language (ENL) population is approximately 12%. Our Special Education (SE) population is approximately 14%. Our Students in Temporary Housing (STH) population is approximately 22%. We believe in providing a well rounded education to our children that is grounded in the standards, emphasizes academics, arts, leadership, and social emotional learning that engages all learners. School Year 2018- 2019 the focus is to strengthen our instructional core and incorporate social emotional learning strategies into our daily curriculum. We have two to three General Education classes on each grade, three Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classes, and one upper grade Self Contained (SC) class. The ICT model allows for the special and general education teachers to work collaboratively throughout the day to adapt and modify instruction and ensure the entire class has access to the general education curriculum. Our Reading program consists of Ready Gen for grades 3-5 and Mondo for grades K-2. Benchmark Writing helps to build writing skills across the 3 key text types identified by the Common Core and other state standards: Informational, Narrative, and Opinion/Argument. All teachers are provided with instructional support to use the curriculum as a resource to help the students meet and exceed the state standards. Eureka Math/ Engage NY is our standards based math program. In order to raise the level of teacher practice, and improve student achievement, all staff engages in ongoing professional development , classroom-based teacher research and data -driven instruction. Social Studies instruction is provided through the implementation of the NYC Passport Social studies Program. is taught through the use of non-fiction and historical fiction to bring multiple perspectives of events to our students. Science instruction is provided through the implementation of the NYC Amplify Science Program for all students K-5. Students engage in a six week cycle of investigation, exploration and experimentation. The scientific process is developed and encouraged in each grade as is the integration of non-fiction literature .. The program is designed to provide differentiated instruction, embedded in the standards has digital resources and focused on content area vocabulary. All classrooms have wireless laptops, and Promethean Boards which enable us to infuse technology into all curriculum areas. Our wireless technology lab offers students the opportunity to engage in a variety of online instructional programs to enhance student engagement and achievement. Students are given the opportunity to engage in Art classes. In addition we are providing access to drumming, music, theater, dance, and robotics. We have community partnerships with a variety of organizations such as, Brooklyn Arts Council, Nu Visions Music Program, Elite After School, After School Reading Club, New York Cares, 67th Precinct, National Training Network for Math, In Our Best Interest Professional Development, and more to come. P.S. 399 encourages parental involvement in a variety of ways. Our school also offers parent workshops to help parents assist their children at home academically as well as to give them the tools necessary strengthen the our partnership. We also have the School Leadership Team (SLT) which is comprised of administrators, staff and parents. The SLT meets monthly to address elements of the Comprehensive Education Plan (CEP), organize family events, review initiatives that have been put into place and keep abreast of school news. Additionally, the Parent Teacher Association (PTA) in collaboration with the Parent coordinator work together to benefit all the students of P.S. 399. The PTA holds monthly meetings to share information, encourage regular communication with parents and recruit 0  volunteers for school functions. The PTA volunteers many hours in order to assist with fund raising and other events for the children throughout the school year. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our English as a New Language (ENL) population is approximately 12%. Our Special Education (SE) population is approximately 14%. Our Students in Temporary Housing (STH) population is approximately 22%. Our ENLs are supported through push in and pull out support services. Our English as a new language (ENL) teacher assists them with building and acquiring the language and vocabulary necessary to help them achieve in their regular classroom setting. Our students with disabilities (SWDs) are supported by our SPED Liaison teacher who does push in as well as pull out support services to ensure that all of our students are serviced. As per the IEP goals, our students require additional scaffolding and explicit instruction to support their learning. We also have Special Education teachers who support our Integrated Collaborative Teaching classes in kindergarten, second grade, fourth grade, and fifth grade. We have one 12:1 classroom that supports our 3rd, 4th and 5th grade students. The students are mainstreamed and are taught in an general education setting as needed. Our STH population is supported by a full time STH social worker. We provide social emotional learning strategies to support their academic progress. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. School year 2017- 2018 the elements of the Frameworks for Great Schools in which our school made the most progress are Collaborative Teachers and Strong Family Ties. Our teachers will continue to work collaboratively and engage in responsive professional learning that will help them grow their pedagogical skills and practice. In addition, we want to improve the rigor in all classrooms and customize our instruction to meet the needs of our individual learners. We also plan to strengthen our strong family ties by empowering our families with the necessary resources to impact student achievement both academically and social emotionally. As evidenced by the NYC School Survey: We received a rating of 2.97 with Rigorous instruction and 1.50 with Effective Leadership. One key area of focus this year is to build instructional coherence school wide to positively impact students, teachers, and families. Another key area of focus is to build school wide systems and structures that incorporate distributed leadership practices to improve in the area of effective school leadership. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 17K399 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 400 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 14 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 11 10 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 93.5% % Reduced Lunch 12.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 7.3% 13.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.19 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 33.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 87% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged YES N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS YES N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 21 23 90.5% 2.3% 14.2% 74.3% 2.7% 7.8% 2 8% 8.5 20.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTHS 2017- 2018 ELA Data 33.4% students level 3 and 4 ELA Growth +7.8% 2017- 2018 School Quality Guide QR 1.1 Challenging Curriculum (Proficient) QR 1.2 Effective Teaching & Learning (Proficient) QR 2.2 Assessment Practices (Proficient) PRIORITY NEEDS An analysis of student performance data on reveal that while some student groups have increased in performance, others have decreased dramatically, especially in the area of written response. It was evident from the data that students lacked critical thinking and analytical skills. Therefore, our goal for the 2018-2019 school year is to have students clearly expressing their thoughts and ideas in written and verbal form. The 2018 State Data indicates 33.4 % of students overall scored at or above grade level in English Language Arts. However, change from grade 3rd to 4th grade was 0.9% and change from 4th to 5th grade was -2.5%. The 2018 State Data indicates 20.4% of students overall scored at or above grade level in Math. We experienced an overall decrease of -0.2%. The change from 3rd to 4th grade was -19.8% and the change from 4th to 5th grade was 11.8%. Additionally recommendations from our 2016 Quality Review Report indicate Pedagogy as an area of focus. NEXT STEPS Continually challenge higher performing students through the use of data driven instruction. Social emotional learning strategies RTI Interventions 3  UDL Principles Growth Mindset Training Look at students' entry points and meet them at their level of need Track and monitor student progress Developing scaffolds to ensure that students are working to their full potential Promote active student engagement in all curriculum areas Effectively align Standards with tasks, instructional outcomes, and rubrics with feedback Track and monitor student progress Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, P.S. 399’s teachers will implement data-driven decision-making to ensure that instructional practices are aligned to the needs of each student, as measured and tracked by ongoing formative classroom assessments, teacher observations, and summative tests, resulting in high-quality differentiated instruction visible in each classroom and an 10% increase in Level 3 students on the state assessments in ELA and Math. 4 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018- June 2019 All classroom Teachers (Grade K-5) including teachers of English as a New Language (ENL) and Students with disabilities. Principal, Assistant Principals, Educational Consultants /Staff Developers (internal and external), ULit Coach and Data Specialist, including classroom teachers and ENL teachers. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Activity #1: Professional Development: PD will be given on the following topics: -Danielson Framework -Rigor and Relevance in the Classroom -Differentiated Instruction-- to address the educational needs of those students who are at risk of not meeting the state academic content standards -Performance Tasks and Assessments -- to monitor and revise curriculum; use of rubrics with the language of the Common Core Learning Standards to provide specific feedback to students regarding their work; use of student data to drive instruction through planning and setting goals -RTI-- to provide additional instruction for our Tier 1, Tier 2, and Tier 3 student population based on our formative/summative and teacher observation data -Common Core Learning Standards-- to develop a better awareness and understanding of the ELA/ Math standards, its alignment to the curricular resources, classroom instruction and mastery expectations -ENL Sensitivity and Awareness-- to better serve the linguistic diverse population by using effective ENL strategies to strengthen content area instruction -Ongoing Implementation / Use of Data analysis-- As a data driven school initiative, ongoing training will be provided so that teachers will continue to analyze the data conscientiously with 5  the purpose of providing instruction that meets the needs of individual students. Activity #2: Research Based Instructional Strategy - Through exposure to intensive reading and writing of informational text and questioning, students will derive a deeper understanding of grade appropriate text. Teachers will share a variety of comprehension strategies that good readers use to help students make sense of text such as making connection, visualizing and monitoring and close reading . Instructional strategies will include explicit instruction in analyzing informational text, teacher modeling, group writing, guiding and probing questions and graphic organizers. Activity #3: Further Development of Teacher Teams - The Teacher Teams across grade levels will meet regularly, reflect on and share information and data about students across the subgroups they have identified. Further focus on examining student work will allow for purposeful adjustment to instruction. Teachers will use research based strategies to provide differentiated instruction and for developing effective lessons. Teachers will be empowered to meet students at their individual level, focus on their teaching methods and use creative ways to maximize instructional and learning time. Activity #4: All teachers and students in Grades K-5 students including students in the ENL and SWD subgroups; and at risk students. All teachers and students in Grades K-5 students including students in the ENL and SWD subgroups; and at risk students. Parents/ Families Workshops to help familiarize parents with: Common Core Standards, State Assessments, Title 1 Mandates ENL Mandates, SWD Mandates, RTI Strategies, and other topics as needed. In addition parents will be engaged in dialogue that speaks to strategies they can use at home to push the academic agenda for their child/children. In addition parents will receive information and training that encourages them to be volunteers resulting in stronger parent/school partnerships. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Educational Consultants /Staff Developers (internal and external), Ulit Coach and Data Specialist, All Classroom Teachers of Grades K-5, including teachers of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Data Specialist, Teacher Teams September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 6  Strategies to increase parental involvement Strategies to increase parental involvement include but are not limited to:  Weekly school messages translated in different languages are disseminated to inform parents about curriculum, testing, special events and additional opportunities for their children to participate in programs targeted to certain populations.  Parent orientation meeting provided for parents of English as New Language students  Regularly scheduled parent conferences.  Parent meetings that are grade specific and focused  Active staff/parent involvement in the School Leadership Team.  Participation in culminating activities from instructional units such as cultural celebrations  Outreach; Parent Monthly Newsletters and on-going communication using class Dojo.  Parent Workshops and training (e.g. Curriculum; a Learning Leadership Program, How can I support my child   for NYS CCLS testing) Family day, Dads Take your children to school Day and community walks. Family fun night events (e.g. pop-up booking making, crocheting, chorus, cooking with your child, Parent Poetry Night and Talent Show)  Timeline: September 2018- June 2019  Key Personnel: Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Teachers Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources – Principal, Assistant Principal, Classroom Teachers, All Teacher Specialists Per Session (contingent upon budgetary funding) for After school and Saturday Academy Instructional Resources – Ready Gen, Engage NY Math Modules, Mondo Reading Curriculum, Social Studies Curriculum, Science Curriculum, RTI Researched Based Programs Scheduling modifications to conduct instructional rounds and teacher data meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The school members will engage with developing theory of action plan for each of the 6 student achievement cycles. We will monitor and track the effectiveness of meeting our goal with our mid year benchmark assessment data. Progress will also be measured via formal and informal observations, and instructional walk- throughs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Benchmark assessments in ELA, Math, and F&P. 7  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? STRENGTHS As evidenced by the 2017- 2018 School Quality Guide, 100%, of the teachers surveyed believe that students are safe in classrooms. As evidenced by the 2016 Quality Review, school leaders consistently communicate high expectations to the entire staff and provide training for meeting expectations. A high percentage of families believes that the communication between families and the home in place and they have been given several opportunities for classroom visitations. School year 2018- 2019 we have instituted Social Emotional Learning for our students, teachers, and families. PRIORITY NEEDS After analyzing student performance data on recent assessments, it was determined that while some student groups have increased in performance, others have decreased dramatically. We noted challenges and difficulties in reading comprehension, math and writing skills throughout the grades. With that in mind, we’re seeking to increase the social emotional development all of our students as a strategy to increase confidence and positively impact student achievement as a priority goal for the 2018-2019 school year. NEXT STEPS Social emotional learning strategies RTI Interventions UDL Principles Growth Mindset Training Track and monitor student progress Data-driven instruction that creates multiple entry points for all learners. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 9  By June 2019, P.S. 399 will fully integrate the research-based Sanford Harmony Program’s specialized teaching strategies across classrooms in order to reduce behavioral referrals by 10%, as measured and tracked by ongoing data from the OORS platform as well as classroom/lunchroom observations, resulting in more positive relationships among students. 0 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Educational Consultants /Staff Developers (internal and external), ULit Coach, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Sped Liaison All classroom Teachers (Grade K-5) including teachers of English as a New Language (ENL) and Students with disabilities. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Activity #1: Professional Development: PD will be given on the following topics: • Sanford Harmony Principles • Social Emotional Learning Awareness • Elements of Restorative Practices • De-escalation Strategies • Attendance Improvement Strategies • Ways to Celebrate Students • Parent Education & Engagement Activity #2: Research Based Instructional Strategy for Social Emotional Learning All Staff Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Educational Consultants /Staff Developers (internal and external), ULit Coach, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Sped Liaison Principal, Assistant Principals, Special Education Teachers, School Psychologist, Activity #3: Classroom Teachers; Sept 2018-June 2019 1 Further Development of the Care Team, SIT Team, RTI Team to address the diverse needs of our SWDs, ENL students, and mandated RTI students. Educational Assistants Guidance Counselor, Social Worker The Teacher Teams across grade levels will meet regularly, reflect on and share information/data about accelerating student learning. They will use case studies and data to provide differentiated instruction as well as support lesson planning. Teachers will be empowered to meet students at their own level, focus on their teaching methods and use creative ways to instruct them to maximize their teaching and learning. Activity #4: Parents/ Families Sept 2018-June 2019 Workshops to help parents become familiar with: Grade Level Standards & Benchmarks, IEP Progress Monitoring, Universal Design for Learning Strategies, ENL Mandates, SWD Mandates, RTI Strategies, and other topics as needed. Workshops grounded in chancellor's Regulations as they relate to parent engagement in schools. Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Teachers 2  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Strategies to increase parental involvement Strategies to increase parental involvement include but are not limited to:  Weekly communication translated in different languages will be disseminated to parents about curriculum, testing, special events and additional opportunities for their children to participate in programs targeted to certain sub-groups  Parent orientation meeting provided for parents of English as New Language students  Regularly scheduled parent conferences.  Active staff/parent involvement in the School Leadership Team.  Participation in culminating activities from instructional units such as cultural celebrations  Outreach; Parent Newsletter  Parent Workshops and training (e.g. Curriculum; a Learning Leadership Program, How can I support my child  for NYS CCLS testing) Family fun night events (e.g. pop-up booking making, crocheting, chorus, cooking with your child, Parent Poetry Night and Talent Show)  Timeline: September 2018- June 2019  Key Personnel: Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Teachers and Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources – Principal, Assistant Principal, Classroom Teachers, Specialists Per Session (contingent upon budgetary funding) for After school and Special Assemblies Instructional Resources – Sanford Harmony Resources, RTI Resources Scheduling modifications to accommodate professional development and student/ parent activities Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point benchmarks that will indicate school progress toward meeting our goal are as follows: RTI assessments, OORS data, IEP Progress Monitoring, and informal observations, teacher feedback forms and review of student data. The benchmarks will be reviewed in February 2019 to monitor our progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 3  OORS reports, ATS Attendance reports, RTI Benchmark assessments, School Quality Guide Survey Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTHS As evidenced by the data on the NYS ELA Assessment, 33.8% of our students reached proficiency in ELA and 20.4% reached proficiency in Math. As per the 2016 Quality Review teachers were proficient with working with each other. As per the 2017- 2018 School Quality Guide 94% of teachers adapt instruction to ensure it represents all cultures and use students prior knowledge to make their lessons relevant to their everyday life. As per the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide 93% of families have had several opportunities to communicate with the school regarding their child's progress/performance PRIORITY NEEDS After an inventory of our curriculum maps, an analysis of teacher observations and teacher feedback, it was determined that our units of study were outdated and they no longer met the needs of our student population and state requirements. Our instruction was not cohesive to Common Core State Standards therefore our children lacked the proper support and instruction they needed in key areas. It was evident from the data that our units of study needed much attention and our teachers needed more professional development in the Common Core Learning Standards. In order to ensure our units of study are fully aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards, our goal for the 2018-2019 school year is to have 100% of our units of study in alignment with the Common Core State Standards. NEXT STEPS Work as a team to modify and revise our curriculum maps. Develop teacher pedagogy so that it meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products. Align assessments to curricula and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom level. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 5  By June 2019, teachers will actively engage in Professional Learning Communities (PLC) organized strategically across grade bands and engaged in collective inquiry and analysis of data related to specific learning targets, resulting in an 25% increase in student progress in the PLC’s chosen learning target areas, as measured by formative assessments used across P.S. 399 in ELA and Math. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Activity #1: Professional Development: PD will be given on the following topics: All Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Lead Teachers Launch Teacher Inquiry Teams Analyze Student Data Implement the use of Data wise protocols Facilitate teacher-to-teacher inter-visitations Differentiated targeted support based on specific learning targets each cycle School leaders create monthly schedule of PD options for teachers Data Reflection Meetings Activity #2: Research Based Instructional Strategy for Inquiry Work: The Teacher Teams across grade levels will meet regularly, reflect on and share information about struggling students they have identified. Emphasis or focus will be placed on student outcomes using an inquiry approach to build capacity. They will use case studies and data to provide differentiated instruction and lesson planning. Teachers will be empowered to meet students at their own level, focus on their teaching methods and use creative ways to instruct them to maximize their learning. Activity #3: Curriculum Redesign: Common Core Learning Standard will be used as a foundation to develop curriculum units of study. Emphasis will be placed on the Power Standards and the units of study will be revised periodically depending on the gaps or flaws in student performance. Standards will be unwrapped with All Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Lead Teachers Teachers Parents Sept 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Teacher Leaders 7 regards to what students should learn and how they will learn. These will be the basis used to create the units of study as well as ensuring that they are fully aligned to the standards. Activity #4: Workshops to help parents become familiar with: Grade Level Standards & Benchmarks, Goal Setting, RTI Strategies, and other topics as needed. Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Teachers Parents/ Families Sept 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Strategies to increase parental involvement Strategies to increase parental involvement include but are not limited to:  Data meetings with parents  RTI check ins  Regularly scheduled parent conferences.  Active staff/parent involvement in the School Leadership Team.  Participation in culminating activities from instructional units such as writing celebrations  Outreach; Parent Newsletter  Parent Workshops and training (e.g. Curriculum; a Learning Leadership Program, How can I support my child for NYS CCLS testing)  Timeline: September 2018- June 2019  Key Personnel: Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Teachers Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources - Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Leaders Instructional Resources - Monday Professional Development sessions; Standards Based Curriculum Planning; NTN Math Professional Development; Data Wise Schedule Adjustments - Master School Schedule; Common Planning Periods Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 8  X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will engage in progress monitoring as a part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Mid-point benchmarks that will indicate school progress are: Running Records, MOSL Writing Assessments, ELA and Math tasks. The benchmarks will be reviewed in February 2019 to monitor progress toward our end of the year goals. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be measured using the evaluation tool ADVANCE, teacher artifacts, student work, formative and summative assessments Beginning of the Year (BOY), Middle of the Year ( MOY), End of the Year ( EOY). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTHS 90% of families say that the principal is strongly committed to shared decision making. 90% of families feel that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school. 82% of teachers say that the principal participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers. 81% of teachers say that the principal encourages feedback through regular meetings with parent and teacher leaders. PRIORITY NEEDS After an analysis our school quality report, ADVANCE data, and 2017-2018 testing data, it was determined that pedagogical practices needed to be strengthened in order to align them with our curricular goals and academic expectations, so that our students will have a more in-depth learning experience. In our school quality report, it was evident that teacher planning, practice, and delivery were not cohesive. Given the evidence, stronger emphasis was placed on intensive professional development sessions to support teaching practices, planning and delivery. Therefore, our goal for the 2018-2019 school year is to have 90% of teachers build capacity in improving outcomes in planning, teaching practice, delivery and supporting collaborative inquiry through research, and evidence based methodologies. NEXT STEPS School-wide Professional Development Plan School-wide Distributed Leadership Teams (School Improvement, Teacher Inquiry, Special Education, Safety, Attendance, Arts, Family Engagement, Organization) Inter-visitations in the school, in the district, and across the city Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 0  By the end of December 2018, P.S. 399’s principal will develop professional growth plans differentiated for targeted groups of administrative and support staff, including assistant principals, the social worker and guidance counselor, paraprofessionals, community associates, and school aides, outlining professional development activities that will result in professional growth by June 2019, as evidenced by ongoing verbal and written feedback from participants. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Activity #1: Professional Development: Administrators, All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals -School-wide Professional Development Plan topics to meet the diverse needs of our school community. -Administrators will attend District, CSA provided trainings and workshops series on the CCLS and instructional tasks when available. -Instructional Specialists, as well as, Central office staff will visit the school to work with the principal and select staff. -All classroom and specialist teachers will participate in weekly department meetings during their common planning blocks with the Assistant Principals, Universal Literacy Coach, RTI Coordinator. Activity #2: Research Based Team Building/ Leadership Strategies The School Improvement Team in Conjunction with the School Leadership Team will work collaboratively together and design short term action plans to address our long school goals. The School Improvement Team is comprised of key stakeholders that is representative of the Framework for Great Schools. September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals Parent Coordinator, Universal Literacy Coach, RTI Coordinator, Special Education Liaison, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker Activity #3 All School Staff Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Lead 2 Distributed Leadership Teams will meet regularly to address the short and long term school goals. Facilitators Per Team Activity #4 Workshops to help parents become familiar with their child's data, set goals, student action plans, and other topics as needed. Parents/ Families Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Strategies to increase parental involvement Strategies to increase parental involvement include but are not limited to:  Active staff/parent involvement in the School Leadership Team  Parent orientation school goals  Regularly scheduled parent conferences.  Participation in culminating activities from instructional units such as cultural celebrations  Outreach; Parent Corner, Positivity Report  Parent Workshops and training (e.g. iReady; Volunteer Orientation; NYS CCLS testing) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Principal, Two Assistant Principals, Universal Literacy Coach, Response To Intervention Coordinator, Special Education Liaison support all teachers. Instructional Resources: Danielson Framework, We TeachNYC, Iready 3  Schedule: Administrators will use a master school schedule that includes time for common planning, weekly Administrative meetings, data meetings, observation reflections, & team meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of qualified teachers will receive a minimum of two observations using uniform observation tools and receive feedback that accurately captures strengths, challenges, and next steps using a shared teaching framework. By February 2019 our MOY progress monitoring data will demonstrate students trending towards 25% progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance; ELA & Math Benchmark assessment tools Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTHS As per the NYC 2017- 2018 School Quality Guide: 90% of families say that they feel well- informed by the communication they receive from their school 93% of families say that they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance 96% of families say that they are likely to go to a regularly scheduled parent-teacher conference with their child's teacher As evidenced by the Quality Review 2016 we received a well developed for our parent partnership to help students succeed. PRIORITY NEEDS After analysis of our formal and informal data we will target specific areas during the school year. We will conduct surveys to determine how to best support our families. We will build more transparency through shared decision- making at SLT meetings with agendas focusing on monitoring and revising the CEP as we work to meet and exceed our school goals. We will strengthen our home school connection and build our school wide instructional coherence through workshops that focus on instructional strategies, the use of data, and social emotional learning strategies. NEXT STEPS Survey our families to determine how we can best support them Sanford Harmony Workshops Volunteer Initiatives 5  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, families will have received ongoing verbal and written briefings on the school’s focus on Social and Emotional Learning (SEL) initiatives, as evidenced by school newsletters, meetings, and workshops, as well as an 10% increase in positive responses to the NYC School Survey, resulting in a broader understanding of the SEL implementation process and outcomes within P.S. 399. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Activity #1: Professional Development: PD will be given on the following topics: Parents/ Families Sept. 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator • Sanford Harmony Principles • Social Emotional Learning Awareness • Elements of Restorative Practices • De-escalation Strategies • Attendance Improvement Strategies • Ways to Celebrate Students Activity #2 Monthly School Leadership Team meetings will be held as a forum to monitor and revise our school goals. Activity #3 School Volunteer Initiative to strengthen our school and family partnership. Assistant Principal Universal Literacy Coach RTI Coordinator Sped Liaison ENL Teacher SLT Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal Parents/ Families Sept. 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator Principal Assistant Principal RTI Coordinator PTA President 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 7  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. District Office, NYCDOE Universal Literacy Program, Sanford Harmony, Community Based Organizations Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Parent Coordinator; SLT; Family Engagement Team; Administration Instructional Resources: Curriculum support; Student data reports; Social emotional learning strategies Schedule: Modify school schedule as needed; After school; Saturday sessions Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 our average Parent attendance at various workshops will have increased by 50%.Our preliminary School survey results will increase by 10%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Coordinator will log parent interactions on a monthly basis. Additionally, we will gather evidence of agendas, attendance sheets, minutes, and surveys. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students scoring at or below level 2 on State assessment Class work Formative Assessments Summative Assessments MOSL Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) 3:00 to 5:00pm on Wednesdays and Thursdays (after school) During the school day Tiered Intervention Pull-out/Push-in Reading Running Records Small group Graphic organizers Reading and Writing Strategies Study Skills Diagrams, charts and tables Computer Adaptive Repeated readings End of the Unit Assessments Report Card Students scoring at or below level 2 on State assessment Mathematics Tiered Intervention Pull-out/Push-in Think Through Math Small group Class work Ten Marks Formative Assessments Number Lines and Number Charts Summative Manipulatives Assessments MOSL 3:00 to 5:00pm on Wednesdays and Thursdays (after school) During the school day 9  Science Computer Adaptive End of the Unit Assessments Report Card Students scoring at or below level 2 on State assessment Tiered Intervention Pull-out/Push-in Learning Resources Small group Science MOSL Scholastic Study Class work Formative Assessments Summative Scaffold support with Scientific Inquiry group Ready Gen Anchor Text are Social Studies and Science Assessments Social Studies Report Card Class work Formative Assessments Summative Assessments Report Card At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) OORS/ ATS Attendance Data Referrals from Teacher Referral by Parent Report Cards Class work Formative Assessments Tiered Intervention Pull-out/Push-in Scholastic Study Small group Learning Resources Scaffold support withessay writing. Ready Gen Anchor Text are Social Studies and Science Services provided by Guidance Counselor. Pull-out/Push-in Small group At-risk Counseling Academic Intervention Services Referral for Community Based Services Intervention 3:00 to 5:00pm on Wednesdays and Thursdays (after school) During the school day 3:00 to 5:00pm on Wednesdays and Thursdays (after school) During the school day 3:00 to 5:00pm on Wednesdays and Thursdays (after school) During the school day 0  Summative Assessments MOSL Computer Adaptive End of the Unit Assessments 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We have approximately 80 students who are in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We plan to provide the following services: A "Bridging the Gap" Social Worker has been assigned to the school. The Social Worker will provide Crisis Counseling to Families, monitor the attendance of STH, meet with shelter personnel. Families of STH will be eligible to collect assistance with school uniforms and school supplies. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Attend various Job Fairs and Hiring Centers to select highly quality teacher candidates. Develop a relationship with the colleges and universities as a means to recruit suitable and qualified candidates. Formulate a school hiring committee to attract highly qualified staff. Provide PD for all new teachers and teachers who are not highly qualified in best pedagogical practices. School leaders and secretary review all credentials to ensure compliance. New teachers will be assigned to a mentor who will interact with them on a weekly basis and provide continued support for three years. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers participate in: School-wide Professional Development sessions   Professional Development sessions on CCLS, Social Emotional Learning, Cultural Responsive Teaching  New Teacher Academy  Buddy Teacher Program  Distributed Leadership Teachers receive additional support through the District, Borough Field Support Center, Central, and External Institutional Professional Learning. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 4  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The school will begin meeting with perspective parents during the spring. We will visit neighboring sites, provide workshops, conducts open houses. We will transition incoming kindergarten students in June with meet the teacher events. We will introduce them to the expectations of Kindergarten and provide summer resources to support their children with the transition. If the budget permits we will provide a three week summer intensive of early intervention as well. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers participate in the decision making process regarding the use and selection of curriculum, assessment, as well as professional development options. Teachers meet in teams during common prep periods and weekly Inquiry meetings to modify and revise our instructional core and assessment systems. Teachers also meet during these allotted times to review student work samples and use the data to guide instruction. Teachers are also represented on the MOSL committee, Instructional, Care, Attendance, Safety, Inquiry Teams and participate in decision making with all school wide systems and structures. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 5  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 358,444.00 39,850.00 12,366.00 6,388.00 3,283,110.00 references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Part 2 x x x x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 6  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 17K399, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Stanley Eugene Clark Elementary School PS 399 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 8  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 9  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 17K399, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 0  ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 1  Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend; ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes; ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2  ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn 3  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: A supplemental program will support students with advanced literacy skills in all content areas. English Language Learners at P.S.399 will have access to high quality instruction and authentic activities in all language modalities. Based on the school data on the NYSESLAT, Measure of Student Learning, and other assessments, ELLs' are in the low percentage and below grade. Newcomers and ELLs who scored at the Entering and Emerging levels on the NYSESLAT and Participants have either arrived The proposed program will also help transitioning and expanding students in grades 2 to 5, to continue the development of speaking, listening, reading and writing skills in English and other content areas. All instruction will be taught in the English language through the content subjects areas(Social Studies, Science, and Math) to provide students with multiple opportunities to use the content vocabulary and develop CALPS language. Additionally, a focus will be placed on ESL strategies and scaffolds to assist students with phonics skills, reading comprehension, and writing skills in order to empower students to be able to independent learners in their mainstream classrooms. The objective is that by the end of the program, students will be able to use at least three reading strategies independently in their general classroom. These supplementary services will help the newcomers increase their English language proficiency in all modalities. ELL students participation in the the supplemental program will strengthen their core knowledge and academic vocabulary. A total of 25 students will participate in the supplemental program in second through fifth grades. The instructional focus will be on students who have extremely limited English vocabulary and who are not able to identify the sounds of the letters nor blend the sounds to read new words in English. As well as expanding academic language and writing skills to the intermediate, advance and proficient students. The supplemental program will take place every Wednesday and Thursday from 3:00pm to 5:00pm for the duration of twenty three weeks. A certified licensed ENL teacher will work with the 25 ELL students: newcomers, entering. emerging, transitioning, and expanding levels. Instructional materials will include the following: language power, IREADY workbooks, and teacher made culturally responsive unit plans. ABC mouse, BrainpopESL, ,MYON, Flocabulary, IXL Math are the software programs that will be utilized in the classroom. and leap pads will be used during instructional periods. Some other educational resources such as sight word/phonics BINGO, writing activity packets will be available to the students also. The supplemental program resources will provide rigorous instruction in the four language modalities( listening, speaking, reading, and writing). $470 per kit x 2 = $940. Art will also be purchase, which will be based on the subjects/themes that will have been covered by the ESL instructor. $300 for math manipulatives. Additional resources that are rich in illustrations are RosettaStone which is $1000 for 10 licenses,and Time For Kids which will be $40. 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional growth and development for teachers is crucial to helping ELL students become commanding in the English language and enhance their achievement in content areas. The ENL teacher and General Education teacher will receive training throughout the school year. Professional learning sessions will take place four times during the 2018-2019 school year for at least two hours each session. The NYC Department of ELLs (Brooklyn South ELL Administers and Univeral LIteracy coach, United Federation of Teachers, Additionally, the ENL teacher and General Education teacher will turn-key the information received from the professional development sessions to school community. Professional learning workshops will be offered throughout the school term. Advanced Literacy, New Language Arts progressions, Next Generation ELA standards, and Implications for ELL students and Selecting the right vocabulary. There will be agendas and attendance sheets for each professional development for record keeping purposes. Overall the ENL teacher will implement language based instructional activities and scaffolds to help the ELLs become critical thinkers and improve their reading and writing skills. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent Engagement activities will equip parents with resources to support ELL students language development and academic achievement. Every second Tuesday from 2:50pm- 3:50pm, parents will be invited to attend a parent workshop. The following topics will be discussed Next Generation Standards, Educational websites and software for ELLs, Vocabulary Activities, How to help ELLs in Core Subjects, and other topics. The ENL teacher, Universal Literacy coach, and other invited Specialists will facilitate the parent engagement activities. All activities will be 6  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities placed on the school calender, posted on classroom Dojo, announced at the morning assembly, and notices will be sent home. The ENL teacher will make follow up phone calls if necessary to remind parents about the workshops . All written materials sent home will be written in English and in the parent's preferred language of communication. Parent engagement activities will have an agenda, attendance sheets, and invitations. Additionally, a translator will be available to those parents who do not speak or understand English. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. A certified ENL teacher and General Education teacher will provide high quality instruction. Language Power, I Ready workbooks, chart paper, markers, index cards, notebooks $5000 Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. $4316 Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional 7  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) $2050 Travel Rosettastone and BrainpopESL will provide support with grammar, vocabulary, and speaking. Myon will increase ELLs reading fluency and comprehension. IXL Math instructional practice. ELLs will be immersed with language through vibrant videos and skills development with Flocabulary software. 8  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Parent engagement activities will be empowered and equipped to help their children at home. Interpreters, materials, and food for parent workshops. Other $1000 TOTAL $12366 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 17 School Name P.S. 399 Borough Brooklyn School Number 399 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ms. Lakeasha Williams Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Arlene Pearson Teacher/Subject Area Erika Barger Teacher/Subject Area Na Related-Service Provider Ms. Yrma Salmeron Superintendent Mr. Clarence. Ellis Assistant Principal Michele Hogan Coach P Washington Thomas School Counselor Rochelle Jeffers Parent Leah Whitehurst Parent Coordinator Rafaela Fulton Field Support Center Staff Member Ms. Marie Bastien Other (Name and Title) N/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 339 0 Total number of ELLs 35 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.32%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) N/A N/A K 1 0 0 0 Lang. None None None None None Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The Stanley Eugene Clark School, PS 399 implements a variety of assessment tools to assess the literacy skills of ELLs. The NYSITELL, Fountas and Pinnell, Running Records, DIBELS (Dynamic Indicators of Basic Early Literacy Skills) , Performance Based Assessments in ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science. In math, the end of the unit and Mid-Module exams are administered to the ELLs . The student's writing samples are analyzed and used for assessment purposes also. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? All classroom teachers and the ENL teacher maintain a Data binder that includes the ELL student's assessments and feedback. Professional Learning Committees/Teams have been establish on each grade level (K-5). Every week teachers on the same grade level meet to analyze and discuss the ELL students progress and areas of needs in literacy and other content areas. The students who scored below grade level in literacy are Progress Monitor every week. ELL students are grouped in three different groups( intensive, strategic, on grade level) based on the results of the DIBELS (Dynamic Indicators of Basic 1  Early Literacy Skills) and Running Records on the assessments. In grades K-2, there is a Pacing calendar which include dates to assess students based on their instructional levels. . 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The NYSELAT, ELL Periodic Asssessment, and the End of the year Measuring Of Student Learning exams in reading, writing, and math, NYS ELA, Math, and Science exams are used to identify the ELL student's progress and areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The summative data from the assessments are gathered and imported in the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT). During the weekly Professional Development sessions, The ENL teacher along with the Classroom Teachers and School Administration discuss the ELL students' areas of need in literacy and the content areas. At risk ELL students are grouped and placed in small groups based on their reading level. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] At risk ELLs and ELLs at the entering and emerging levels will receive RTI everyday. Entering/emerging ELLs will receive scaffolds( graphic organizers, visual aids, and home language support). During instruction, the content area vocabulary words will be written in English and the ELLs home language. Along with visual aids and graphic organizers, other resources will be utilized to guide instruction such as books on tape, Raz-kids, Phonics ESL workbooks and Myon. Myon and Raz-kids are technology programs that guide the students through a book by reading the text aloud to them as well as showing the pictures that go along with the text. These programs also highlights specific vocabulary in the text which increase the ELL academic language. These approaches models appropriate reading behaviors for all students, thus, the students will begin to recognize what fluent reading sounds like, recognize sight words, text features , and pronunciation. All ELLs are provided with IPAds during small group instruction and independent work activities. The IPADS include applications programmed for students' English language proficiency and academic level. The ENL teacher will implement Burst lessons from the Amplify curriculum that will help increase the ELL students' literacy skills in letter recognition, phonological awareness, word recognition and reading level. Additionally, the ENL teacher will develop and implement lessons that will increase the ELL students' reading comprehension through during lessons. The ENL teacher will equip ELLs with strategies to comprehend and analyze informational texts along with word building strategies. Additionally, the ELL students will receive small group instruction in the writing process to increase their writing skills. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSELAT, ELA and Math assessments are used to evaluate and inform our ELL programs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ELL Data Analysis Tool is used to inform all school staff( classroom teachers and ENL teacher) and Administrators about the ELL student's language proficiency and areas of need in the ELA and Math. Once a week, grade level conferences take place to analyze student's data. During these grade level conferences, the ENL teacher provides the classroom teachers with ENL instructional strategies and scaffolds that can be used with the ELL students. The ENL teacher sends articles and other instructional resources via email to classroom teachers to support the ELL students academically and English language proficiency. Part IV: ELL Programming 2  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. All ELL students at P.S. 399 receive ENL services. The ELLs are programmed according to their grade and English language proficiency levels. Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding level students are serviced during the Integrated ENL period. Entering and Emerging level ELLs receive 180 minutes of Integrated and 180 minutes of Stand Alone ENL services. ELLs on the Transitional level receive 180minutes a week of Integrated Content Area ENL instruction. Expanding and Commanding level ELLs receive 90 minutes a week of Integrated ENL instruction. The stand alone ENL instruction include two grade levels, for example, grades K-1, 2-3, 4-5 entering/ emerging ELLs are programmed together. The entire ENL program is provided in heterogeneous groups using differentiated instruction to meet the student's specific needs. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL teacher schedule reflects the mandated minutes for each student according to their language proficiency level. CR Part 154 is used as a guide to program all the students at P.S.399. Entering and Emerging ELLs receive 180 minutes of Stand Alone ENL instruction and 180 Integrated ELA instruction. During the Integrated ENL periods, the Transitioning and Expanding students receive 180 minutes of ELA and content area instruction. The ENL teacher has a master list of small groups which she works with in the classroom. All ELL students receive four periods per week of integrated ENL with the exception of the Commanding level ELLs. Commanding students(former ELLs) receive 90minutes of ELA and content area instruction per week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Integrated ENL usually takes place in the content areas. Graphic organizers, Google Translator, pictures, nursery rhymes, age appropriate songs, sentence frames and word banks are incorporated in every lesson. Many turn-and-talk opportunities are given to the students so that ELLs can participate in conversations and practice what they hear so they can become fluent in speaking English. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The Spanish Lab is administered to newly registered students who's home language is Spanish. For the NYS Math and Science exams the ELLs have someone to interpret the exams in their home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing 3  d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The instructional schedule for ENL services are based on ELL students' English language proficiency level. Entering and Emerging students are mandated 360 minutes a week and Transitioning students 180 minutes a week. Students that are proficient and tested out of ENL will also be programmed for 90 minutes per week. Most students are grouped by grade level for Stand Alone ENL instruction. The implementation of differentiated instruction within small groups with a great emphasis on cooperative work, and individual instruction is in place. Students that are SIFE and Newcomers benefit from working with language proficient students. This method allows the creation of a students centered learning experiences that focus on content process. Content may be modified for students who need additional practice with essential elements before moving on. Differentiated instruction for ELL students is determined through assessment strategies and a variety of differentiated resources that address the wide range of knowledge, ability levels, interests, and learning styles that the students bring to the classroom. After testing with NYSITELL, NYSELAT, the ELA, periodical assessments , Computer Adapted Test, and unit test, the item analysis is examined by the ENL Committee and ENL teacher. Content of the instruction will be defined with remediation, enrichment or acceleration. The administration of the school as well as the Reading and Math coaches offered the ENL teacher as well as the monolingual teachers on going Staff Development, Articulation meetings and workshop using data to drive instruction. The Newcomers and SIFE students use classic movies in the ESL video library (Pinocchio, Cinderella, the Cat is the Hat, etc.) , as well as movies on the Discovery Channel and United streaming. These video programs are watched during the ENL class and in the General Education class, so ELLs can develop their listening skills, vocabulary and comprehensions skills, as well as developing social and academic language. Raz- Kids is an independent reading and listening program based on students who achieve reading fluency and comprehension. This program meets the needs of all of our subgroups. Newcomers begin by listening and following the text. As students advance in language acquisition, students will read the text only. Students progress from levels A to Z (as set by Fountas and Pinnell). Newcomers and SIFE students utilize the BrainPop ESL and Rosetta Stone to develop vocabulary , speaking and listening skills. Brain-POP Computer Software is a skills-based, self-paced, and data-driven instruction program. This language arts program focuses on reading comprehension and English language conventions. Students may start at a very low level and gain confidence to move up. This program meets the needs of intermediate and advanced ELLs. Since ELLs are kept with their grade level peers, all students, regardless of their subgroups, are exposed to the same content as their peers. However, SIFE students and newcomers who are at the entering level of ENL are provided with many language frames to go with the content. An emphasis on academic vocabulary and phonics are emphasized in the lesson. Also, Turn-and-talk helps with student's oral language and fluency. Long term and former ELLs get more emphasis on writing and reading comprehension, as these seem to be the areas they are most weak in according to the NYSESLAT and MOSL assessments. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The Ready Gen Reading Program Scaffolded strategies Handbook support the ELL students. The material accelerates ELLs language acquisition with scaffolded strategies to help unlock the text the teacher is reading through activities, and routines that supports speaking, listening, reading and writing. It also provides a system that allows the students the understanding of how words work in complex text. It divides the Text Based Vocabulary into Tier III words, (words important to understanding the text) and Tier II ( words that require explanation). ; All content areas are delivered in English. For transitioning students whot are able to read in their home language, a translation application is programmed on the IPAD. For students that are at the Entering and Emerging levels, the test is orally translated in their home language. P.S. 399 has been using content areas objectives correlative to language objectives as well as, writing, and reading objectives. Each content lesson becomes part of a lesson in listening, speaking, reading and writing. As well as a lesson in language functions related to the topic of the lesson. Each content lesson will use vocabulary and language strategies, formulating questions and answering questions, grammar, language structure, etc. The continuation of teaching the content with alignment with the language objectives will have students reach standards. Second-language is developed while 4  teaching content-area instruction. The rubric that assesses the content area has the language and speaking standards integrated. Also when teachers are teaching Science, Math and Social Studies they are incorporating and teaching the academic vocabulary, using the Language and Speaking CORE Standards in context to make the information comprehensible. The result of the Math Performance , Science and Math Unit assessment indicates how the students’ second language is developed. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? A clear vision for each student is continuously monitored throughout the school year. This data changes as the proficiency levels of the students across language and content areas are varied. This data is reflected by teacher’s observation, student's work, and assessments. Emphasis is given to the student culture, throughout the school. There is a strong respect for diversity and an appreciation of all home languages this is a priority in our academic plan. The school has established a common school-wide practices toward ELLs as well as all students. IEP goals as well as data are carefully monitored to drive instruction.The ELLs identified as having special needs are mainstreamed at P.S. 399, accommodating their learning needs. ELLs students with an IEP participate in small group instruction. An organized plan is developed with task-based recommendations. Ready Gen, is a Reading Curriculum that helps ELLs as well as lower level readers. Ready Gen is designed help the ELL SWD by Scaffolding strategies in the Handbook. The material accelerates ELLs language acquisition since it scaffold strategies, and helps unlock the text the teacher is reading. This takes place through activities, and routines that support speaking, listening, reading and writing. It also provides a system that allows the students the understanding of how words work in complex text. It divides the Text Based Vocabulary into Tier III words, (words important to understanding the text) and Tier II (words that require explanation). The ELL student who is identified as a Student With Disabilities and has an IEP plan receives intervention from Universal Literacy Coach, Raz-Kids, and Brain POP, after-school and before school activities, and ongoing parent teacher articulation. These students are also getting support from the SETTS teacher, Guidance Counselor and the ICT teacher. ' 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. PS 399 uses technology programs (Brainpop, Raz-Kids, and IXL math) along with the Wordly Wise and Words the Way as intervention programs. Another resource is Read Works which has reading passages that mirror ELA common core standard based passages. IXL math is also widely used throughout the school. Students can log into their math IXL accounts at home to practice math concepts. Teachers can follow students' progress and assess where their students are in order to inform instruction. RazKids, as mentioned previously allows the teacher to set the level of reading for the student and can draw assessments reports to also inform their teaching. Lastly, PS 399 offers a few parent workshops throughout the year and the parent coordinator serves as interpreter for our Spanish speaking parents as that is the most common home language in our school as well as instruction on the different Internet resources. This helps to empower parents to help their children at home in the different content areas. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year the administration will consider organizing more time for classroom teachers to plan together with the ENL teacher. The following ELL topics will be covered during the school's Professional Development: Rigorous Instruction for ELL students, How to meet ELL students language needs in the content areas, and Effective Instructional Strategies for ELL students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 5  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELL students have equal access to all school programs. The ELL students receive invitation letters to participate in after school and extra-curricular activities such as Tap dance, Book Club, Robotics, etc. These letters are translated in the ELL students Home language. An after school program is offered every Spring to ELL students in grades 3-5. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. PS 399 uses technology as intervention programs, for example, Rosetta Stone, BrainPop ESL, Read works, and ESL Phonics for all ages, and Wordly Wise. Read works have reading passages that mirror ELA common core passages. It also has answer sheets so that the students can check their answers. Classroom teachers use the SOLVE graphic organizer during math instruction which allows break down a math word problem as well as differentiate activities for students based on the students' needs. . Teachers can follow students' progress and assess where their students are in order to inform instruction. RazKids allows the teacher to set the level of reading for the student and can draw assessments reports to also inform their teaching. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support comes in the form of the school-home connection. Parents are invited to a number of workshops throughout the year to inform the parents on how they can help their child at home. There is usually a Spanish interpreter present. For the other languages, parent volunteers or other school staff assist in interpreting the information, when needed for other languages a translator is hired. Also, the parent coordinator sends home communication in the different languages. We will continue to provide dictionaries, Ipads with a translation application, and on going parent support 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All the resources that the school uses are research based materials, which have been designated the grade level they are most appropriate for. Different programs have been purchased that specifically cater to the lower grades (K-2) and others that specifically cater to the upper grades (3-5). 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Not Applicable 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In the beginning of the school year, ELL students and their parents are invited to "Meet the Teacher/ Curriculum Night ". The students and their parents receive information about the the instructional resources and expectations of the school year. Throughout the school year, there are parent workshops that help orient parents on how to use the many resources in our school. The Parent Coordinator facilitates a Title 1 workshop. ENL teacher offers on going workshops on how to understand Common Core Learning Standards. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 6 N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? There are a number of professional development opportunities offered by the Brooklyn South Field Support center and the United Teachers Federation. The ENL teacher will attend workshops after school and on weekends at the UFT offices. Additionally, the school principal will grant the ENL teacher permission to attend workshops, as feasible, facilitated by the Brooklyn South Field Support staff during school hours. General Education teachers, related service providers, and support staff are encouraged to attend professional development workshops on how to support ELLs in the Common Core Learning Standards. After attending professional development workshops, the ENL teacher will meet with teachers and non-pedagogic staff in the school building to turn key the information. Some of the topics explored at the workshops are ( Engaging ELLs in Rigorous Instruction, Effective Co-Teaching Models in an Integrated ENL class, and Using Poetry to facilitate Academic Language Development. General Education teachers have been encouraged to attend professional development outside of the building regarding teaching ELLs. The English as a New Language classroom is a resource center with ongoing articulation with the classroom teachers. The classroom teachers are invited to borrow ENL materials from the ENL classroom and they are invited to observe ENL methodology during instructional periods. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teacher coordinates parent meetings on Tuesdays during the parental involvement sessions. Reading comprehension skills, how to engage ELLs in higher thinking tasks, academic language, and foundational skills are discussed during the individual meetings. Other topics discussed at the meetings are strategies to help ELLs read fluently, writing activities and scaffolds for ELLs. Instructional resources and activities about how to help ELLs improve on the NYS exams(NYSELAT, ELA, Math, and Science.) Parents are also invited to meet with the ENL teacher on Tuesday afternoons for student led conferences to discuss ELLs' progress in the ENL program. Over the phone Interpretation/Translation services will be available to the parents if necessary. 7  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The ELL parents are included in all school activities throughout the school year. Every morning during the school assembly, the Parent Coordinator announces upcoming parent meetings, special events, and/or workshops for parents. P.S. 399 Administration, ENL teacher, and classroom teachers make every effort to involve parents of ELLs in all school activities. The Chancellors' initiative "Dads Bring Your Child to School" is held at P.S. 399 the third week in September. The dads bring their child/children to school and participate in classroom routines and instructional tasks. Parents are also involved in "World Literacy Day" activities in February of every year. Other annual parental involvement activities are "Curriculum Night" and the "Rainbow Festival in the Spring. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 8 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Marion J. Brown, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 9  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 399 School DBN: 17K399 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Ms. Lakeasha Williams Principal Ms. Rose Graham Assistant Principal Ms. Fulton Parent Coordinator Ms. Arlene Pearson ENL/Bilingual Teacher Leah Whitehurst Parent Ms. Irma Salermon Teacher/Subject Area 1/1/01 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 N/A N/A N/A N/A Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 P. Washington-Thomas Ms. Jeffers Mr.C. Ellis Ms. Marie Bastien 10/20/17 N/A N/A N/A 1/1/01 0 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: 399 Superintendent: Clarence Ellis DBN: 17 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Arlene Rose Pearson Graham ENL Teacher Asst. Principal No No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The parents' language preferences for both written and oral communication are derived from ongoing communication with parents. Information provided by the parents on part III of the Home Language Identification Survey is entered into the ATS system. During registration, all parents are asked their preferred language to communicate with the school, so this information will be used to identify and assess the language preferences of the parent community at P.S.399. Another method of collecting data is the Student Emergency Contact cards. Student Emergency Contact cards are on file in the main office and all classrooms.The ENL teacher, Pupil Secretary and Parent Coordinator have identified families who have indicated a preference for speaking a language other than English. Official Dept. of Education documents and school letters will be written in the parents' preferred language. 1  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Ewe Haitian Creole Spanish 6 1 12 15 1.92 0.32 3.83 4.79 6 1 13 15 1.92 0.32 4.15 4.79 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Not Applicable Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Ongoing 9/2018-6/2019 Ongoing 9/2018-6/2019 Ongoing 9/2018-6/2019 Fall 2018 and Spring 2019 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The ENL teacher will download and print the documents in the parent's preferred language. The office personnel will give the parents this document in the parent's preferred language. If necessary, the emergency card will be interpreted by a Bilingual staff member. This document will be sent to the Translation and Interpretation Unit. This document will be sent to the Translation and Interpretation Unit. ELL Compliance Forms Emergency Cards Monthly School Calendar Parent Teacher Conference Announcements 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Back to School Night September 13, 2018 Parent Teacher Conference Fall 2018, Spring 2019 Parent Engagement Activities school year Monthly meeting during the 2018-2019 New ELL Parent Orientation Meetings Ongoing 9/2018-6/2019 interpretation service(s)? Ms. Fulton, Parent Coordinator and Certified Bilingual staff members will translate. If necessary, the teachers will utilize Translation services and over the phone interpretation services. Ms. Fulton, Parent Coordinator and Certified Bilingual staff members will translate. If necessary, the teachers will utilize Translation services and over the phone interpretation services. Ms. Fulton, Parent Coordinator and Certified Bilingual staff members will translate. If necessary, the teachers will utilize Translation services and over the phone interpretation services. We will also hire translators and headsets for the parents. Ms. Fulton, Parent Coordinator and Certified Bilingual staff members will translate. If necessary, the teachers will utilize Translation services and over the phone interpretation services. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, all classroom teachers will refer their class rooster and the emergency contact person or persons information listed for each of their students. The emergency contact information will include someone who is Bilingual and can speak English fluently and the home language of the limited English proficient families. Classroom teachers or designated staff members will call the someone from the emergency contact list in the event of a school emergency. Bilingual staff members who speak the home language of the limited English proficient families will be available to communicate also. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The ENL teacher will facilitate a Professional Development to train all staff members at P.S. 399 on the policies and procedures on how to meet the language needs of parents who home language is not English and the Chancellor's 3  Regulation A-663. Training will consist of a power point presentation and a video on how to dial in to the Translation and Interpretation services hot line . A handbook on the steps of using the Translation and Interpretation services will be distributed to all staff members and posted in the main office. Additionally, resources will be available such as translated signs, bilingual glossaries, and vendor information of interpretation equipment. All pertinent personnel has full access to the Over the phone Interpreter Services and are familiar with the procedures on how to obtain Translation and Interpretation services as needed. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Each of these notifications have been enlarged and posted at the entrance of the school building. The main office staff, Parent Coordinator, and School Safety Agent have additional copies of Department of Education required parent documents. At PTA and ELL Parent orientation meetings, the parents are asked which language they prefer to communicate. Based on the parents' response , a staff member who speaks the families home language will interpret in addition the school will hire translators from the approved Department of Education providers list. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In the beginning of the school year, the families will be asked to complete a home language survey to indicate their preferred language to communicate. Based on the feedback from the families survey, ongoing observations, and communication with the parents, the ENL teacher will provide training to all staff members on how to utilize the Interpretation and Translation services. This resource will help improve language services at P.S.399. 4 
