 14K414 School Name: BROOKLYN ARBOR ELEMENTARY SCHOOL Principal: EVA IRIZARRY   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Brooklyn Arbor Elementary School 14K414 331400010414 PK-5 School Number (DBN): 325 South 3 rd St, Brooklyn NY 11211 718-963-0393 718-963-2083 Phone Number: Fax: Eva Irizarry EIrizarry3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 14 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Eva Irizarry LiatOlenick Mary Swanhaus Eva Irizarry N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Alicja Winnicki Superintendent: 215 Heyward Street, Room 246 AWinnicki@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-302-7638 Phone Number: 718-302-7978 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston St., Room 501 BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-225-5119 Phone Number: 718-935-4314 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Eva Irizarry LiatOlenick Mary Swanhaus Mollie Bruhn Heather Costanza *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Heather Heide ReshamMantri Amy Lyons Jen Kuhn Emily SpuntYemini Teacher Parent Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission and Vision Section 4: CEP Overview Brooklyn Arbor is a comprehensive pre-kindergarten through fifth grade learning community dedicated to providing a safe and nurturing environment where students can thrive academically, emotionally, and socially. All students will receive an education that places a premium on relationships, engagement with the wider community, and scholarship.   At Brooklyn Arbor, we firmly believe that this period of exploration, discovery and practice should be met with an interdisciplinary , project-based , arts and technology infused curriculum which will encourage developing minds to forge connections, take intellectual risks, and foster strong habits and values. Brooklyn Arbor maintains that school, at all grade levels, should be meaningful, fun-filled and responsive to each child. Our goal, in partnership with parents, is to cultivate a college-bound student body full of organized, self-reliant, resilient and flexible learners who respond to tricky personal and global issues with zest and reason, as the world that will one day be theirs will undoubtedly demand it. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. When we opened Brooklyn Arbor’s doors in September 2012, we were a K-2, with an enrollment of just under 200 students. Today we have more than tripled in size, as we serve pre-k through fifth grade with over 630 children joining us on a daily basis. With currently 9% English Language Learners and 19% Student with Disabilities and families of all ethnic backgrounds, we hold the highest of expectations for all staff, students and community members to create a safe and supportive environment in which all students can thrive. As a relatively new and growing public school, it is with great purpose and focus that we continue to recruit and hire a corps of educators who share that vision and strive to meet the needs of every student by relying on both sound pedagogical practice and a deeply held belief that for every child, anything is possible. Teachers, peers and parents work together to meet the demands of a rigorous and comprehensive curriculum by identifying learning opportunities that transcend school walls, and by seeking out ways to make each school day both meaningful and joyous. With every member of the Brooklyn Arbor cheering them on, each student develops the academic, social and emotional skills needed to meet the growing and dynamic demands of the academic landscape and 21st century workplace. Sure of step and resolute in purpose, Brooklyn Arbor students will use their clear and cogent thinking to make the world a better place for all. Arbor is partnered with St. Nicks Alliance, Reading Rescue, Responsive Classroom, Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, Common Threads, CookShop, Brooklyn Arts Council, and Pure Edge. This will be our third year participating in the CS4All SEPJr. program. This will be our first year participating in the PEWorks Program with the NYC Department of Education. Our Instructional Focus for both 2017-18 and 2018-19 is "Writing About Reading". 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our school has 9.36% English Language Learners and we have a Spanish Dual Language Program for grades K-4. 19% of students have IEPs, with classifications such as Speech and Language, Learning Disabled, Emotionally Disturbed, Other Health Impaired and Autism. Our school has at least one ICT class in grades 1-5. We also have two bridge self-contained classes, one for grades 1-3 and one for grades 4-5. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 0  As indicated on our 2017-2018 NYC School Survey Report, we were well-above the citywide percent in four out of the six areas surveyed. Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership, Strong Family-Community Ties and Trust have been our consistent areas of strength. Providing rigorous instruction and cultivating a supportive environment will be at the forefront of our work this school year. Through our partnerships with Responsive Classroom, Brooklyn North, and Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, combined with school-wide practices, we hope to increase the level of rigor and opportunities to challenge students' thinking, all the while making them feel safe and valued. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 14K414 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 597 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 27 27 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 22 18 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 62.0% % Attendance Rate 54.9% % Reduced Lunch 7.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 60.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 29.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.25 0% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 56.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 81% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO YES NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO YES N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 62 62 94.5% 7.2% 20.1% 2.7% 2.3% 4.4% 2 5% 6.5 53.8% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As stated in the New York City Department of Education’s STEM framework, “The jobs that are available today are not the jobs that were available to workers in the 20th century and a 20th century education will not adequately prepare today’s students for the world they will need to navigate...Being STEM-ready and digitally literate is what our students need to be prepared for this new global reality.” Exposing our students to high quality science and technology education is an area to prioritize. However, implementation has its challenges. Based on the mid-year survey given during the 2017-2018 school year, classroom teachers find it challenging to devote ample time to teaching science and technology lessons. In Spring 2018, classroom teachers provided detailed weekly schedules to administration. From these schedules, school leadership determined that our best course of action would be to modify expectations around time spent on various subjects. We created a model weekly schedule with two classroom periods devoted to STEM. At least two periods per week will be used for the new Amplify Science Curriculum and 10-15 periods during the year will be reserved for teaching a full unit of computer science, well ahead of the NYC DOE's goal of doing this by 2022. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, K-4 classroom teachers will implement phenomena based science instruction aligned to the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) by teaching two periods of science on "STEM Fridays" using the new Amplify Science Curriculum. In addition, all K-5 classrooms will complete one unit of computer science on "STEM Fridays". 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Selected Science Liaisons will attend summer professional learning sessions offered by the NYC Department of Education and Amplify that introduce the main component of the new program deep dive into the first unit of study. Science Liaisons will turn-key the above summer training to grade teams. Science Liaison on each grade level (K-5) Classroom Teachers Teachers will participate in school inter-visitation to see the Science and Technology curriculum in action. Classroom Teachers Following up on introductory sessions held in Spring of 2017, SEPJr. Cohort 1 and Cohort 2 teachers will train all classroom teachers on successful implementation of the Code.org CS unit. Classroom Teachers Science Liaisons and Administration will attend ongoing professional development offered through Brooklyn North and Amplify which will be turn-keyed to grade teams, including on Election Day. Science Liaisons July and August 2018 Science Liaisons, Amplify Consultants August 2018 Science Liaisons (K-5), Administration, Coach, Science Specialist Fall 2018 and Spring 2019 Prior to each unit launch to be determined by each grade team October - June 2019 Science Liaisons, Science Specialist, Coach, Administration SEPJr. Cohort 1/2, Coach, Administration Science Liaisons (K-5), Science Specialist, Administration, Coach ENL teacher will align instruction using the curriculum to provide appropriate scaffolds to help students gain access to content. Resources about the new science standards, Amplify program and Code.org will be shared with families throughout the school year (newsletters, FAQ sheets, etc.) Principal and Assistant Principals will attend summer training on the new science standards and Amplify program. Teachers who are not Science Liaisons or SEP Jr. Cohort 1/2 members will be offered opportunities to attend professional development workshops through Amplify and Code.org to strengthen their understanding of these content areas. K-5 Students October -June 2019 ENL Teacher, Administration Families of K-5 Students September - June 2019 Classroom Teachers Administration July 2018 Administration K-4 Classroom Teachers August 2018- June 2019 Classroom Teachers 4  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In September, during the Meet-the-Teacher event, classroom teachers will communicate with families about this new structure and introduce families to the new standards and units of study. A universal slide will be created that will be included in all of these presentations. School leaders will share this same information with families at the September Parent Association meeting. Additionally, families will receive resources throughout the school year to help support their children at home. Parents will also hear more about STEM instruction through monthly class newsletters. All families will be invited in for at least one NGSS Expo to celebration student work across all grade levels. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Next Generation Science Standards Code.org Science/Amplify/CS4All City-wide Training and Support Curriculum guides/Teachers Edition for K-5 classroom teachers Consumable student materials (workbooks, folders) Classroom Teachers ENL Teacher Brooklyn North Professional Developers Amplify online support Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring X SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, all K-4 classrooms will be visited by school leaders, closely monitoring instruction and student work products through a Learning Walk. Monthly curriculum maps will be monitored to ensure the outlined pacing 5  calendar is being followed. Additionally, grade teams will analyze lessons and student work during their Inquiry Work meetings to make needed adjustments for future lessons/investigations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Walkthroughs and formal/informal observations using the Danielson Framework Evaluation of Planning Documents, templates, rubrics and checklists Monthly Curriculum Maps Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? During the 2017-2018 school year a group of teachers formed an inclusion committee in the hopes of increasing student levels of empathy and school-wide understanding of differences. The committee was created to help increase pro-social behaviors school-wide and help the our students with disabilities (19% of our student body) feel more included and understood. Additionally, the school guidance counselor organized a small series of assemblies that explored topics of empathy, bullying and disabilities. These initiatives were well received by staff, parents and students, however, the school's environmental survey for the 2017-2018 school year indicated that 66% of teachers strongly agree that students with disabilities are included in all school activities, and 47% of parents whose children have IEPs strongly agree that the school offers a wide variety of opportunities to improve life outcomes for their child. Teachers and parents have raised concerns during UFT consultation committee meetings and Parent Association Meetings and have expressed interest in continuing and expanding the efforts made in 2017-2018. Empathy is the foundation of emotional and moral intelligence. Furthermore, research shows that students with a strong sense of empathy perform better in school and have stronger critical thinking skills. Research also shows that students who feel that they are full participants in their learning community show increased engagement in the classroom. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 100% of students in PK-5 will be exposed to an interactive curriculum designed to increase empathy and appreciation of diversity, as measured by pre- and post- sociograms developed by our Inclusion Committee. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All classes will have 2-4 opportunities to attend assemblies or participate in workshops during the school year. These assemblies and/or workshops will explore topics of empathy, disability, and difference. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? PK-5 Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers Classroom teachers and support staff will engage in professional development to develop shared vocabulary and strategies for teaching students about empathy and differences, in addition to a comprehensive review of common learning disabilities. Staff September-June 2018 Two Book of the Month titles will be on topics of empathy and understanding. Teachers will be given discussion questions to guide classroom talks. PK-5 Teachers and Students October 2018- May 2019 Parents will be invited to a workshop that will give them tips and ideas on how to support empathy and understanding. PK-5 Families and Students January 2019 School staff and families will create a “buddy bench” in the school yard, to be monitored by school staff who supervise recess. PK-5 Students October-November 2018 School Leaders Guidance Counselor IEP Team Classroom Teachers School Leaders Guidance Counselor IEP Team School Leaders Classroom Teachers School Leaders Guidance Counselor IEP Team School Leaders Guidance Counselor IEP Team Lunch Support Staff 8 A leaflet will be created and disseminated to parents that includes a list of recommended books and strategies for discussing differences. PK-5 Families and Students November-December 2018 Classroom Teachers School Leaders Intentional efforts will be made to include books that address differences and empathy at this year's book fair. PK-5 Families and Students October 2018-June 2019 School staff will conduct a presentation at a Parent Association meeting to discuss learning disabilities and the IEP process. School staff will analyze schedules and programs across the school day and school year to ensure small classes are included in a variety of ways. School staff will include literature about the benefits of ICT programs in the Summer Mailing for all students in ICT classes and norm the language that is used in summer welcome letters for ICT classes. This language will be integrated into resources provided to tour guides to assist with demystifying ICT programs for prospective families. PK-5 Families November-December 2018 K-5 Students Mandated for 12:1:1 Classroom Settings K-5 Families and Prospective Families September 2018-June 2019 October 2018-June 2019 Guidance Counselor IEP Team School Leaders Parent Association Classroom Teachers School Leaders IEP Team Classroom Teachers School Leaders IEP Team Classroom Teachers School Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. This CEP goal will be shared with parents during one of the fall Parent Association meetings. Resources will be sent home periodically throughout the school year to help parents facilitate conversations with their children about empathy and inclusion. Additionally, parents will be invited to a workshop to learn more from classroom teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Session Opportunities Extended professional learning time Books of the Month Guest Speakers, Assemblies 9  Professional Texts and Articles Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded X X Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all PK-5 classes will have attended two assemblies focused on empathy/inclusion. Additionally, staff will complete a mid-year survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Events Calendar School Library Collection Observations/Rounds Socio-grams Surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At the end of the 2017-2018 school year teachers were asked to provide feedback on our use of Tuesday’s professional development time. The majority of teacher indicated that the current structure was not meeting their needs. 61.9% of teachers indicated that they would prefer to engage in longer cycles of professional development in lieu of exploring different topics every week. 28.6% of teachers indicated they were not sure if they wanted to make this switch and only 9.5% of teachers stated that they preferred not to change the structure. Studies show that when teachers have opportunities to collaborate and engage in ongoing professional development, students perform better. The School Development Committee also reported a strong desire to organize and plan cycles of professional development that are more tailored to teachers’ needs and interests. Teachers with specific expertise (such as Responsive Classroom, science instruction, technology instruction, promoting empathy, etc.) will have the opportunity to lead these various cycles. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will have completed a minimum of four 5-week cycles of professional development. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The SDC will outline the various cycles of PD for the school year, which includes topics such as "Computer Science", "Culturally Responsive Teaching", "Meeting the needs of SWDs and ELLs" etc. The SDC will consult with teachers and outside consultants to determine who will lead each PD cycle. SDC will meet monthly to continue planning these PD cycles and to make modifications as necessary. PK-5 teachers and paraprofessionals Summer 2018 School Development Committee, Administration PK-5 teachers and paraprofessionals August 2018-June 2019 School Development Committee, Administration PK-5 teachers and paraprofessionals September 2018-June 2019 School Development Committee, Administration The Mid-Year survey will provide teachers the opportunity to provide feedback on the PD cycles structure and offerings. PK-5 teachers and paraprofessionals January 2019 The SDC and other classroom teachers will write Donors Choose proposals to acquire professional texts for use in these professional learning cycles PK-5 teachers and paraprofessionals September 2018-June 2019 Teachers will be given opportunities to sign up for further trainings (Responsive Classroom) throughout the school year to further hone their knowledge. PK-5 teachers July 2018-June 2019 School Development Committee, Administration School Development Committee, Administration, Teachers Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School leaders will share this new approach to professional development during the fall Parent Association meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2  Per Session Universal Literacy Coach Extended Professional Learning Time Professional Texts (through Donorschoose) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG X X Title II, Part A PTA Funded X X Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, all teachers and paraprofessional will have completed two cycles of professional learning. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Professional Growth Plans (PGP) Professional Learning Plan Professional Learning Logs Pacing Calendars Grade Team Lots Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At Brooklyn Arbor, teachers are highly respected members of the school community and play a role in decision making on many levels. During summative meetings at the end of the 2017-2018 school year, many teachers indicated a desire to have administrators visit their classrooms more regularly during community building time, instead of only visiting during instructional times for evaluative purposes. Since school administrators began a new cycle of supporting lunch and recess throughout the three periods, less time was spent on these community building classroom visits. This was also discussed during UFT Consultation Committee meetings as teachers expressed a desire to have school leaders more present in classrooms. Additionally, reviewers visiting our school also indicated that increasing these types of visits would be an important next step for the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school administrators will have visited all classrooms at least 9 times. Three to four of these visits will be for evaluative purposes. Three of these visits will have an instructional focus and the other three visits will be reserved for school leaders to visit classrooms during community building times (morning meeting, closing circle, publishing parties, etc.) 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School leaders will create a shared document to chart out classroom visits for the year. They will indicate and distinguish between evaluative and non-evaluative visits. PK-5 Teachers September-October 2018 Administration School leaders will include an opportunity for staff to give feedback on these classroom visits on the mid-year survey. PK-5 Teachers January 2019 Administration N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. This will be discussed and shared at monthly PA meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Leadership Schedules Prep Schedules School wide calendars 5  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, all classroom teachers will have received at least 2 non-evaluative classroom visits. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Brooklyn Arbor’s Midyear and End of the Year Internal Survey One on one Summative Conferences (June 2019) 2018-2019 NYC School Survey Classroom Visits Tracking Tool Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school has created ample opportunities for parent involvement and engagement through workshops, meetings, Open House days, guest speakers, Family Fridays, trips, fundraising, committees and more. However, most of these opportunities have not offered parents the chance to engage with their children. In response to parent interest voiced during School Leadership Team meetings and Parent Association meetings, there is a clear need to incorporate more opportunities for parents to participate in teacher-led workshops with their children. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, each grade-team will have organized and executed one “Parent and Me” Night, where grade-level parents and students are invited to participate in a learning experience together, which could include Student Led Conferences. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents will be invited to complete a short survey about the topics they would like to see covered during a “Parent and Me” Night. PK-5 Students and Families September-December 2018 Classroom Teachers, Families, Parent Coordinator The School Leadership Team will work in tandem with grade teams to create and implement a schedule for these “Parent and Me” events. PK-5 Students and Families Sept - November 2018 Classroom Teachers, Parent Coordinator, SLT members, Administration All school publications (parent handbooks, website, newsletters, etc) will widely advertise the opportunities and workshops. PK-5 Students and Families Oct-June 2019 Administration, Classroom Teachers, Parent Coordinator Notices and reminders for Parent Association meetings will be provided regularly Families Sept-June 2019 Administration; Parent Association N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. St. Nicks Alliance Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Weekly and Monthly newsletters which will include school and community events School website Parent Association Members 8  Parent Teacher Conferences Class Parent Volunteers Parent Coordinator Family Calendar Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG X X Title II, Part A PTA Funded X X Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2019, at least 3 “Parent and Me” nights will have occurred across the school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance at events/workshops Parent Feedback on the end of year survey as well as anecdotal feedback 2018-19 Family Calendar Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) -F&P Reading Levels -On-demand writing pieces Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) -Guided Reading groups; strategy lessons; Shared Reading/Writing -Special Education Teacher Support Services -Small groups work -Oneto one conferences When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) -After School Tutorial -During the school day -Before School Tutorial -Saturday Academy -End of Unit writing samples -Double-dose Fundations -NYS ELA Assessment Results -Flocabulary Mathematics -Teacher recommendation -Report Card grades -Teacher Observation -Beginning of Year Baseline Assessment -Pre and Post Module Assessments -NYS Math Assessment Results -Teacher Recommendation -Report Card grades -Teacher Observation -Reading Rescue -Orton Gillingham -AISpull out groups -AISafterschoolprogram -Small group -One-to-one -During the school day -Saturday Academy -AISpull out groups -Deepening students’ number concept and increasing addition and subtraction fluency with conceptual understanding, through the use of carefully chosen manipulatives, strategic questioning techniques, and interactive technology. -Xtra Math Program -EngageNY 0  -Zearn Science -NYS Science Assessment Results -Cross-curricular lessons -Pre and Post Unit Assessments -Project Based Lessons -Teacher Recommendation -Amplify Program -Small group -One-to-one -During the school day -During the school day -During the school day -Afterschoolwith CBO -Report card grades -Teacher Observation -Pre and Post Unit Assessments Social Studies -Cross-curricular lessons -Small group -One-to-one -Teacher Recommendation -Passport curriculum -Report card grades -Teacher Observation -Teacher Referral -Parent Request At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) -Responsive Classroom Approach -Small group -One-to-one -Group discussions, Morning Meeting and Closing Circle -Role playing -Play therapy -Building self-control -Modeling -Social stories -Brainstorming -NABEservices 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Not Title 1 N/A Not Title 1 Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 9 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2 School supplies, uniforms, etc. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $550 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 4  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A Not Title 1 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 5  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Brooklyn Arbor Elementary School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Brooklyn Arbor will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 8  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 9  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing monthly newsletters between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Brooklyn Arbor , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 0  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 1  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● wear school clothes daily ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 3  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: Our supplemental program during the 2018-2019 and the 2019-2020 school years will take the form a Newcomer ENL after-school program. As we move into our seventh year of operation, our current ELL population has stabilized around 60 students. We continuously see an influx of newcomers that arrive at our school every fall and regularly throughout the school year. Nearly 30% of our school’s ELLs have received less than two years of ENL services. In order to provide our newcomers with the personalized small group instruction that they need, we designed an after-school to meet their needs. We will host 16 sessions during the fall semester on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:45pm to 4:30pm. We will host 16 sessions in the fall. (16 X 1.75 X 2 X 60.65 = $3396.40). We will host an additional 24 sessions during the spring semester (24 X 1.75 X 2 X 60.65 = $5094.60). The language of instruction for this program is English. However, native language supports will be provided when beneficial to student learning. Permission slips notifying families about the ELL after-school program will be sent home on two separate occasions in both English and the family’s preferred/native language in the weeks before the program commences. Furthermore, we will send virtual fliers home via SchoolCNXT in both English and the family's preferred/native language. The parent coordinator will personally call each ELL family and orally confirm their participation in the family’s preferred/native language. Once the program is in motion, our Assistant Principal, Sara Yerry, will collect and compile records of student attendance throughout the duration of the after-school program. Two instructors, who hold an ENL or Bilingual certification, will teach our Newcomer ENL Afterschool Program. They will work together to ensure after school instructional time is best serving the needs of our Newcomer population as the school year progresses. There are approximately 20 students who will be participating in the after-school ENL program (all ELLs who have received less than 2 years of language support services). Groupings and instructional focus will be based on language ability across the four modalities. We will use teacher input, reading levels, and data gleaned from NYSESLAT results to inform these groupings and maximize learning potential. The ratio of students to teachers (10 to 1) will allow for efficient targeted instruction in small groups. Each group of approximately 10 ELLs will have one ENL or Bilingual Certified instructor, who will adapt the methods of instruction to best suit individual student needs. We will be utilizing the "In The USA" curriculum published by National Geographic. This curriculum provides essential language and literacy skills for newcomers and preliterate students. The materials are supplemental and distinct from those used for daily instruction. Activities that students will engage in during the program include: phonics and sight word instruction, shared and guided reading, interactive writing and read-aloud. Students will be grouped by age. Group 1 will include first and second grade newcomer students. Group 2 will include third-fifth grade newcomer students. We will utilize two classrooms for instruction. 6  rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: All teachers presenting ELL related PD instruction to their fellow staff members, especially those who are instructors for the Title III after school program, will maintain their own personal schedule of ELL related PDs throughout the school year that are provided by the DOE or other providers such as Teachers College. Every PD has a written record for its agenda and attendance that is filed in a binder for ELL related PD materials. This binder is kept and maintained by the ELL Coordinator. These PDs allow teachers to share knowledge and resources with each other in order to collectively prepare for all ELL related situations and scenarios (such as practicing differentiation or preparing for surprise Newcomer arrivals mid-year). As a result, a cohesive vocabulary and game plan is formulated in order to provide every ELL at Brooklyn Arbor with a support system that makes sense, as they travel their journey from fear to fluency. Supporting Newcomers and their Families Professional Development Rationale: An instructional priority for our school is meeting the needs of our newcomer students during the instructional day. As such, it is necessary to provide teachers who have newcomers in their classes with targeted professional development to help them tailor their instruction in literacy, math, science and social studies. The focus will be on differentiating instruction to meet the specific needs of students who are in the process of acquiring second language literacy, and in many cases, first language literacy. We will also address how to build relationships with parents of newcomers as these relationships are essential for success in any academic program. Dates: November 7Time: 8:30-9:30am Total Hours: 1 hours Name of Provider: Brooklyn Arbor Staff – Alexis Dixon, Sara Yerry, Heather Heide Qualifications: ENL/Bilingual certified teachers # of Participants: 10 Audience: Classroom teachers and cluster teachers who service newcomers during the instructional day. No cost to Title III Preparing for the NYSESLAT Professional Development Rationale: In order to best support student performance on the NYSESLAT exam, it is critical that classroom teachers understand the design and content of the test. Our ENL teacher will review the 2017-18 school year NYSESLAT scores then provide teachers with an overview of the exam along with suggestions for incorporating activities into their daily classroom routines that will help to support student achievement on the Spring 2019 exam. Date: Two dates in March Time: 2:45-3:15 (OPW Time) Total Hours: 1 hour Name of Provider: Alexis Dixon Qualifications: ENL certified teacher # of Participants: 10 Audience: Classroom teachers who service ELLs during the instructional day. 7  Part C: Professional Development No cost to Title III ELL Book Club Professional Development Staff members will engage in a cycle of professional development using the book The ELL Teacher's Toolbox. The ELL Teacher’s Toolbox is a practical, valuable resource to be used by teachers of English Language Learners, in teacher education credential programs, and by staff development professionals and coaches. It provides hundreds of innovative and research-based instructional strategies you can use to support all levels of English Language Learners. Written by proven authors in the field, the book is divided into two main sections: Reading/Writing and Speaking/Listening. Each of those sections includes “Top Ten” favorites and between 40 and 70 strategies that can be used as part of multiple lessons and across content areas. Dates: 5-week cycle of professional development on Tuesdays beginning in December.Time: 3:20-4pm Total Hours: 3 hours 20 minutes Name of Provider: Alexis Dixon, ENL teacher Sara Yerry, bilingually certified teacher/AP Audience: Classroom teachers who service ELLs during the instructional day. # of Participants: 10 Cost to Title III: $34.95 x 10 copies of The ELL Teacher's Toolbox = $349.50 (OTPS) Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Conference Days Dates: 11/5, 11/13, 2/26 Name of Provider: Teachers College The ENL teacher and one classroom teacher will attend the following workshops: · Supporting Students in Beginning Stages of Language Acquisition (11/5/18) · Providing Culturally Relevant Teaching and Opportunities for Language Development (11/13/18) · (2/26/19) Cost to Title III: $75 per ticket x 3 dates X 2 teachers per dates = $450.00 Substitute teacher coverage: $185.05 X 4 dates = $740.20 Planning Time for Title III Afterschool Program Teachers will meet with Sara Yerry, school administrator to plan for teaching and learning activities for the Title III supplemental program. We will analyze student work and assessments and plan next steps for instruction. Each afterschool instructor will get 2.5 hours of per session planning time # of participants: 3 Audience: Alexis Dixon, ENL teacher and Donna Griebel, TESOL certified teacher 2.5 x 2 x 60.65 = $303.25 Support Students Learning English as a New Language Navigate Non fiction Texts Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities 8  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: Engaging parents of ELLs and F-ELLs in the academic lives of their children is a priority for our school community. ELL parents are notified of parental engagement activities through colorful flyer invitations (in English and the preferred/native language of the parent) and direct phone calls home from DL/ENL teachers and the parent coordinator. Translation needs of parents are met through providing all verbal and written notifications in their home language, as well as providing translation services at any and all events. Every event has a written record for its agenda and attendance that is filed in a binder for Parent Engagement record keeping along with the flyer invitation and all its translated versions. This binder is kept and maintained by the Parent Coordinator. Our parent engagement activities for the 2018-19 and 2019-20 school years include: Dual Language Parent MeetingsRationale: Parents of students in our dual language program need guidance in supporting their children's academic growth in two languages. Our dual language parent meetings help parents to better understand the dual language curriculum and language development. Additionally, parents are provided with lists of at-home resources to use to further support learning. Date: October 11, 2018Time: 8:30am-9:30amName of Provider: S. Yerry, L. BurdickAudience: Parents of students in our K-4 dual language classes. No cost to Title IIIELL Family Breakfast Rationale: In order to foster a continued sense of community and provide familiar faces with relevant program information, the Brooklyn Arbor ELL Committee invites English Language Learner parents to a school breakfast. During this time, staff introductions are made and educational questions and concerns are discussed and answered as we prepare for another successful year of ELL student achievement! Date: 9/25, 6/4Time: 8:30 AMName of Provider: M. Molina, S. Yerry, Alexis Dixon Audience: Parents of our English Language Learners and the Brooklyn Arbor ELL Committee Cost to Title III: $140.00 Computer Literacy WorkshopsRationale: This series of workshops will provide parents with an overview of free websites and programs that support English language acquisition, literacy and math. Parents will be taught basic computer navigation skills and be given time to explore a list of educational websites that can be accessed via home computer, smart phone or tablet. Many parents of ELLs and F-ELLs have expressed a desire to learn more about how to access educational websites. Some of the sites we will teach parents how to access and use are: XtraMath, Reading Bear, BrainPop ELL and Co-Writer.Date: Ongoing Tuesdays Time: 2:45-3:20 (Parent Engagement Time) Name of Provider: T. Williams, S. Yerry, A. Dixon Audience: Parents of ELLs and F-ELLsNYSESLAT Information Session Rationale: Parents of ELLs need to be informed about the structure and dates of the NYSESLAT exam. Date: 4/12 Audience: Parents of ELLs Provider: Alexis Dixon, ENL teacher No cost to Title III 9  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Per session Per diem $9465.95 Purchased services 1. High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. $450.00 Supplies and materials 2. $2310.05 Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) $0 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Part B -Direct Instruction Supplemental Afterschool Program We will host 16 sessions in the fall. (16 X 1.75 X 2 X 60.65 = $3396.40). We will host an additional 24 sessions during the spring semester (24 X 1.75 X 2 X 60.65 = $5094.60). The total cost to Title III will be: $8491.00 Each afterschool instructor will get 2.5 hours of per session planning time. 2.5 x 2 x 60.65 = $303.25 Substitute teacher coverage: $223.90 X 3 dates = $671.70 Part C - Professional Development Teachers College $75 per ticket x 3 dates X 2 teachers per dates = $450.00 Supplemental Materials To Be Purchased: · Publishing&nbsp; $34.95 x 10 copies of The ELL Teacher's Toolbox = $349.50 · Houghton&nbsp;Mifflin&nbsp;Harcourt Rigby leveled books for supplemental ENL library $1750.32 · Folders for student work for afterschool program. $70 Benchmark Education Supplemental leveled Spanish books for ENL library $140.23 Vendor: Staples Vendor: Wiley Vendor: 0 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Parental Involvement: Refreshments for parent engagement breakfasts: $140.00 Travel Other TOTAL $0 $140.00 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 14 School Name Brooklyn Arbor Elementary School Borough Brooklyn School Number 414 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Eva Irizarry Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Alexis Dixon Teacher/Subject Area Abby Loomis/4th grade dual lan Teacher/Subject Area Ingrid Alvarez/1st grade dual Related-Service Provider Superintendent Alicja Winnicki Assistant Principal Sara Yerry Coach Heather Heide School Counselor Chaya Gahfi Parent Waldo Walle Parent Coordinator Maria Molina Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 0 2 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 5 2 D. Student Demographics 2  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 609 Total number of ELLs 56 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.20% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 1 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 1 1 0 1 1 2 0 1 1 3 0 1 1 5 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 5 0 0 5 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1. To assess early literacy skills of our ELLs we use Fundations (a phonological/phonemic awareness, phonics and spelling program), and Fountas and Pinell reading assessments in both Spanish and English. These tools test a variety of skills including: decoding, comprehension, sight word recognition, spelling, sound-symbol relationship, reading with fluency and writing. We also use Estrellita assessments in grades K-1. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3  In order to support this effort we have developed strong relationships with NYU, Hunter, and Brooklyn College to bring graduate students into our classrooms as teaching assistants. These TA's work in tandem with ENL and DL teachers to help support assessment in both languages. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Brooklyn Arbor’s program for English Language Learners evaluates its success based on the consistent progress of its learners, and it will continually adapt and grow to meet the needs of its student population. To assess early literacy skills of our ELLs we use Fundations (a phonological/phonemic awareness, phonics and spelling program), and Fountas and Pinell reading assessments. These tools test a variety of skills including: decoding, comprehension, sight word recognition, spelling, sound-symbol relationship, reading with fluency and writing. We keep consistent running records of student reading progress, which provide accurate insight into a child’s decoding and thinking/comprehension processes since it is administered on a one-to-one basis. In this setting, the child is more at ease, has a lower affective filter and tend to perform at their best. Furthermore, we administer the ELL periodic assessment in the (early) Fall and (mid) Winter in order to identify areas of need and gauge how best to support a student's language growth trajectory before they take the NYSESLAT exams in the Spring 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? By looking at the data provided by these tools, as well as informal assessments made by teachers in the classroom regarding the four modalities tested on the NYSESLAT exam, ENL and classroom teachers work together to define short/long term learning targets for each student and tailor instruction to meet their most urgent needs. By using the data we gather to plan our instruction with efficiency and collaborate with purpose, we truly make the most of our time together in the classroom. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] At Brooklyn Arbor, students are provided with increasingly intensive targeted instruction designed to match their learning needs, as demonstrated by performance on periodically administered assessments. The majority of ELLs continue to make strong progress at Brooklyn Arbor, demonstrating that their language needs are being met in Tier 1 (general DL and ENL instruction). When evidence gathered from running records, the ELL periodic assessments, and the yearly NYSESLAT examination (along with high risk ELLs indicated through data collected and analyzed with the AMAO tool) indicates that an ELL has stopped making progress, or even regressed, a team of pedagogues meets to consider if that student should receive increasingly intensive targeted instruction in Tier 2 or 3. The team considering an ELLs’ progress utilize a problem-solving process and a body of evidence to make decisions. For ELLs, the documentation analyzed should include: an explanation of how instruction was differentiated to address home and second language concerns and cultural differences, a description of the amount and type of ENL instruction, an understanding of whether or not home language support was used, a description of the amount and type of home language instruction (as appropriate), an identification of instructional areas (specific skills and competencies) that need more intense intervention (Tiers 2 and 3), and the extent, if any, to which ENL instruction and/or native language instruction is needed during Tiers 2 and 3 interventions to ensure the student will benefit from the intervention. All students, including ELLs, are only evaluated for special education when they do not respond to effective and rigorous instruction, or additional intervention that is provided with increasing intensity and is both culturally and linguistically responsive. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. In September, the ELL Coordinator pulls the RLAT, RNMR, RESI reports from ATS and inserts them into the ELL Data Analysis Tool. This allows him to instantly see a multitude of information with greater clarity, and immediately identifies the at risk students at the beginning of the school year. Most importantly, it provides a detailed break down of the NYSESLAT exam report and measures the progress made or lost in each of the four modalities. This immediate insight into a learner's level of 4  ability in a each modality allows for better planning when creating ENL pull-out classes and in-class learning groups. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? At the start of each school year, the ELL Coordinator the ELL Coordinator is responsible for gathering the relevant data from ATS and using the ELL Data Analysis Tool to disseminate it. A meeting is held between ENL and DL staff where the findings are shared and discussed. Following the input from this meeting, the ELL Coordinator creates the ENL program schedule for the year and presents it to the administration for feedback. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Brooklyn Arbor's ENL program has evolved from a pull-out standalone ENL model to a hybrid (pull-out/standalone ENL and push-in/integrated ENL) model as per the mandates in CR Part 154.2. The new mandates for minutes of instruction per week for all ELLs is as follows: 180 minutes of stand alone instruction and 180 minutes of integrated instruction for Entering and Emerging ELLs / 180 minutes of integrated instruction for Transitioning and Expanding ELLs. In order to provide these minutes of ENL instruction, the ENL teacher provides pull-out/standalone ENL instruction for ungraded homogeneous groups of Entering and Emerging ELLs 4 times a week for 45 minute periods. Furthermore, the remainder of the ENL teacher's schedule is dedicated to providing push-in/integrated ESl instruction in Brooklyn Arbor classrooms. This allows the ENL teacher to partner with various classroom teachers in lesson planning and instruction, as he scaffolds learning for small groups of ELLs in various grades and across content areas. In order to accomplish this, ELLs in various grades are grouped in classrooms together, sometimes (but not always) with mixed proficiency levels. In this way, the ENL teacher provides 45 minutes of integrated ENL instruction 4 times a week to all ELLs (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding) at Brooklyn Arbor Furthermore, our population of former ELLs (within the last two years) is also carefully arranged throughout our ELL focused grade classrooms. In this way, they can join the small group integrated ENL instruction for a minimum of 90 minutes per school week. This new model ensures that all ELLs (current and former) receive the mandated minutes of instruction in the appropriate fashion as per CR Part 154.2. b. TBE program. If applicable. A1.b. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. Brooklyn Arbor has self-contained DL classes in K-4. Our program will expand to reach students in K-5. ELLs and EPs are fully integrated throughout the instructional day. Each core content area is taught in both Spanish and English (reading, writing, science, social studies and word work). At Brooklyn Arbor, the dual-language program follows an alternating full-day model of language instruction. Students spend full days immersed in either English or Spanish. Over a ten-day period, students spend five full days being instructed in Spanish and five full days being instructed in English. Our dual language classes are self-contained. As per CR Part 154.2, ELL students placed in Dual Language classes receive well over the minimum of 360 minutes of bilingual instruction per week (2 units of study) for students classified as Entering and Emerging ELLs, and the minimum of 180 minutes of bilingual instruction per week (1 unit of study) for students classified as Transitioning or Expanding ELLs. 5  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The new mandates for minutes of instruction per week for all ELLs as per the CR Part 154.2 is as follows: 180 minutes of stand alone instruction and 180 minutes of integrated instruction for Entering and Emerging ELLs / 180 minutes of integrated instruction for Transitioning and Expanding ELLs / 90 minutes of integrated instruction for Former ELLs (within 2 years of transitioning our of ELL services). In order to provide these minutes of ENL instruction, the ENL teacher provides pull-out/standalone ENL instruction for ungraded homogeneous groups of Entering and Emerging ELLs 4 times a week for 45 minute periods. Furthermore, the remainder of the ENL teacher's schedule is dedicated to providing push-in/integrated ENL instruction in Brooklyn Arbor classrooms. This allows the ENL teacher to partner with various classroom teachers in lesson planning and instruction, as he scaffolds learning for small groups of ELLs in various grades and across content areas. In order to accomplish this, ELLs in various grades are grouped in classrooms together, sometimes (but not always) with mixed proficiency levels. In this way, the ENL teacher provides 45 minutes of integrated ENL instruction 4 times a week to all ELLs (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding) at Brooklyn Arbor Furthermore, our population of former ELLs (within the last two years) is also carefully arranged throughout our ELL focused grade classrooms. In this way, they can join the small group integrated ENL instruction for a minimum of 90 minutes per school week. This new ENL program model ensures that all ELLs (current and former) receive the mandated minutes of instruction in the appropriate fashion as per CR Part 154.2. At Brooklyn Arbor, the dual-language program follows an alternating full-day model of language instruction. Students spend full days immersed in either English or Spanish. Over a ten-day period, students spend five full days being instructed in Spanish and five full days being instructed in English. Our dual language classes are self-contained. As per CR Part 154.2, ELL students placed in Dual Language classes receive well over the minimum of 360 minutes of bilingual instruction per week (2 units of study) for students classified as Entering and Emerging ELLs, the minimum of 180 minutes of bilingual instruction per week (1 unit of study) for students classified as T 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our Dual Language program serves English and Spanish speaking children. All students are taught together throughout the day. The language of instruction changes via the alternating full-day model of instruction, allowing for instruction in both languages to be balanced throughout all content areas. For reading and writing, teachers use the Teacher's College Reading and Writing Workshop. The workshop is either taught in English or Spanish, depending on the day. For math, teachers use GoMath resources in both English and Spanish. All students have two copies of the workbooks--one in English and one in Spanish. Students do phonics work in both English and Spanish – Fundations is used for English and Estrellita for Spanish. For Science we use Harcourt and FOSS. FOSS lessons and workbooks are available in both English and Spanish. Social studies lessons are conducted in both languages. ELLs and SLLs are supported via use of visuals, direct vocabulary instruction and use of the SIOP approach to lesson planning to scaffold language learning within the context of content area instruction. In this way, we foster ELL language development while striving toward the Common Core Learning Standards. Dual Language teachers have social studies, science and math libraries in both languages to fully support content area instruction. The ENL teacher provides pull-out/standalone ENL instruction for ungraded homogeneous groups of Entering and Emerging ELLs 4 times a week for 45 minute periods. This time focuses primarily on building foundational skills for language acquisition (i.e. phonics, vocabulary growth, and oral fluency). The remainder of the ENL teacher's schedule is dedicated to providing 6  push-in/integrated ENL instruction in Brooklyn Arbor classrooms to support ELLs as they attempt grade level tasks and aspire toward meeting the expectations of grade level standards. The ENL teacher partners with various classroom teachers in lesson planning and instruction, as he scaffolds learning for small groups of ELLs in various grades and across content areas. In order to accomplish this, ELLs in various grades are grouped in classrooms together, sometimes (but not always) with mixed proficiency levels. In this way, the ENL teacher provides 45 minutes of integrated ENL instruction 4 times a week to all ELLs (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding) at Brooklyn Arbor. Furthermore, our population of former ELLs (within the last two years) is also carefully arranged throughout our ELL focused grade classrooms. In this way, they can join the small group integrated ENL instruction for a minimum of 90 minutes per school week. This new ENL program model ensures that all ELLs (current and former) receive the mandated minutes of instruction in the appropriate fashion as per CR Part 154.2. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students in the dual language program who are identified as native Spanish speakers based on the HLIS and parent/student interview, are given the Spanish LAB in addition to the NYSITELL to determine language of dominance. Throughout the instructional year, students are given a variety of home language assessments to determine levels of performance in their native language (Spanish). The Spanish Fountas and Pinnell "Sistema de evaluacion de la lectura" is used to monitor native language reading level. Spanish running records are given three times per year. Student high frequency word knowledge is assessed using the Fountas and Pinnell kit as well. The Estrellita phonics program is used to measure knowledge of Spanish letter sounds as well as decoding abilities. These formal assessments, coupled with informal classroom assessments (conferences, guided reading, Spanish writing and math samples) provide us with a wealth of information regarding native language strengths and areas for growth. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 5a) SIFE students are taught using a multi-sensory and multicultural approach. Furthermore, if determined appropriate, SIFE students are prime candidates for the rigorous and personalized instruction provided by our Response to Intervention (RTI) program. Regardless, ENL materials are infused throughout all aspects of the instruction SIFE students receive. They have access to libraries that are aligned to the ELA Standards and contain supplemental materials in their native language. The libraries include a variety of books on all levels that support the backgrounds, strengths, and English language needs of our SIFE students. SIFE students work with the ENL teacher who operates a pull-out/push-in (stand alone/integrated) model. The use of technology is also incorporated into the curriculum for all SIFE students. Goals are met by using instructional approaches and methods such as cooperative learning/group work, discovery, expository learning, brainstorming, demonstration method, role play, differentiation, cooperative learning, and small group instruction in English and in their native language. SIFE students have their SIFE status removed once they score at the intermediate/transitioning level or higher on the NYSESLAT. 5b) The majority of our ELL population has been in US schools for less than three years and, as a result, are classified as newcomers. Given their lack of exposure to English, we provide them with extra visual support, opportunities to build academic vocabulary, and exposure to cultural stories, song and traditions. We aim to provide these supports throughout all content areas. Those students who have just arrived to the United States are placed in either a Dual Language class or an ENL class for Newcomers. This ENL class utilizes the “In the USA” Newcomer literacy program created by National Geographic. Class activities focus on essential language and literacy skills, as well as, most importantly, vocabulary acquisition. Tactile and kinesthetic vocabulary exercises are interwoven with a heavily scaffolded (i.e. visuals and use of native language) phonemic awareness and phonics based curriculum. These students are "on the radar" of every Brooklyn Arbor teacher, and every possible "teachable moment" is utilized to help them acquire the meaning of another word, as they prepare the foundation for their future fluency in the English language. 7  5c) ELLs who have been receiving services for between 4-6 years are classified as Developing. This population is a minority in our ELL program and the majority of students at Brooklyn Arbor under this classification have reached the Expanding/Advanced level. Those who continue to struggle to test out of the Emerging level have their progress reviewed by the principal and relevant teachers/service providers in order to determine if they are a candidate for the RTI program. Developing ELLs have, by this time, usually amassed an array of abilities in regards to communicative competence and oral skills over the course of years of ELL instruction. Therefore, as the years progress and assessments are used to determine specific areas of weakness, especially in regards to reading and writing, a team of educators including the ENL teacher, Dual Language teachers, Reading Specialist, and Administrative leaders convene to develop a plan of focused instruction to best assist this student as they transition into Middle School. 5d) Presently, Brooklyn Arbor services grades PK-5. Therefore, in order for a student to qualify as a Long Term ELL (7+ years of ELL services) while enrolled at Brooklyn Arbor they would have to begin ELL services in Kindergarten, repeat at least one grade, and remain in the program throughout their entire Elementary school career. If such an event were to happen (it has not yet happened throughout Brooklyn Arbor’s four year history), the student would have amassed an array of abilities in regards to communicative competence and oral skills. Therefore, as the years progressed and assessments were used to determine specific areas of weakness, especially in regards to reading and writing, a team of educators including the ENL teacher, Dual Language teachers, Reading Specialist, and Administrative leaders would convene to develop a plan of focused instruction to best assist this student as they transition into Middle School. 5e) Students who have reached proficiency are still offered support for up to two years after they pass the NYSESLAT. This support comes in the form of 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction a week where Former ELLs are provided direct support across content areas as they work toward Common Core standards within their own classrooms. Furthermore, all students in this category are offered extended time (1.5x) on all testing (New York State, Acuity, classroom, etc.). The ENL teacher will be notified of any students who are still struggling with any academic area in order to provide them, and their teacher, with additional support. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ENL teacher plans closely with the classroom teachers, in order to provide scaffolding for classroom content so that the students have the tools necessary to incorporate this learning into their personal knowledge. They then can work with the information at a higher level of understanding. The following methods of instruction are followed in all classrooms:   (1) Guided reading of additional language appropriate texts to develop background knowledge. (2) Explicit vocabulary instruction on key words and concepts. (3) Additional practice of foundational concepts. (4) Use of visuals to aid comprehension. The ENL teacher also supports classroom instruction and school wide curriculum by reviewing math, science and social studies content lessons with ELL students using sheltered English and scaffolding techniques to ensure that they are learning the essential subject-based vocabulary and core concepts. Teaching strategies include: (1) scaffolding- modeling, bridging, contextualizing, use of realia, schema building (2) graphic organizers (3) digital media (4) TPR (total physical response) (5) nursery rhymes (6) puppetry; (7) music (8) bookmaking; (9) role play and readers’ theatre. All of these strategies lead to greater language acquisition and enriched language communication and expression. These strategies are used to help each students build language fluency upon the phonics knowledge foundation they acquire through consistent use of the technology based Reading Bear program. Additionally, Brooklyn Arbor’s staff of administrators and teachers works in collaboration to ensure that ELL-SWDs receive all services mandated on their IEPs. For example, the ELL coordinator/ENL teacher meets with classroom teachers at the beginning of the year to ensure that ELLs with IEPs that mandate they receive bi-lingual instruction are placed in the Dual Language class (if grade appropriate), while ELLs with IEPs that mandate they receive ENL instruction are placed in the freestanding ENL program. As a student’s IEP changes/evolves over time, teachers will meet, collaborate, and adapt their instructional strategies to best service the needs of that student. The process of crafting differentiated language/academic 8  support for ELL-SWDs in an ongoing and evolving process that the Brooklyn Arbor staff takes very seriously. ELL-SWD students who have special needs are given differentiated instruction in different modalities. After identifying the particular need(s) through multiple assessments with the school psychologist, classroom teacher, and ENL teacher, along with indications on the IEP, students are grouped by need and given appropriate individualized instruction by special-ed support teachers while simultaneously being enrolled in the ENL program. Therefore, ELL-SWD students receive more scaffolding than the general-ed students in their heterogeneous ENL group. When logistically possible, we always aim to provide push-in services for ELL-SWD students. The ENL teacher works closely with the special-ed teachers and with all the paras in each classroom to design activities and programs to support the needs of the ELL population in those classes. The ENL teacher works in tandem and meets regularly with all the student's classroom teachers and other service providers. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ENL planning and scheduling is a cooperative effort between the ENL teacher, classroom teachers & various other service providers mandated by a student's IEP, designed to ensure that ELL students receive grade appropriate content and materials with additional support. Brooklyn Arbor ensures that flexible programming is used to maximize time spent with non-disabled peers by integrating ELL-SWDs in heterogeneous ENL groups, as well as heterogeneous afterschool clubs that focus on a variety of subjects, from literacy groups to yoga, cooking, and drama. Furthermore, Brooklyn Arbor has ICT classrooms in the 1 st , 2 nd , 3 rd , 4 th , and 5 th grade levels. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Brooklyn Arbor offers a range of targeted intervention services for ELLs in ELA, math and other content areas. Our three-tiered Response to Intervention (RTI) program provides early, systematic assistance to children who are having reading difficulty. RTI seeks to prevent academic failure through early intervention, frequent progress measurement, and increasingly intensive research-based instructional interventions for children who continue to have difficulty. Our ELA-focused RTI program involves a second tier: small group instruction with the ENL teacher, as well as a third tier: one on one instruction with a bilingual SETSS specialist. Furthermore, Home Language support is provided in both ELA and small group math instruction through various bi-lingual staff members as well as a variety of native language resources such as books, flashcards, and digital media. The ENL teacher also supports classroom instruction and school wide curriculum by reviewing math, science and social studies content lessons with ELL students during periods of Integrated ENL instruction using sheltered English and scaffolding techniques to ensure that they are learning the essential subject-based vocabulary and core concepts. Teaching strategies include: (1) scaffolding- modeling, bridging, contextualizing, use of realia, schema building (2) graphic organizers (3) digital media (4) TPR (total physical response) (5) nursery rhymes (6) puppetry; (7) music (8) bookmaking; (9) role play and readers’ theatre. All of these strategies lead to greater language acquisition and enriched language communication and expression. These strategies are used to help each students build language fluency upon the phonics knowledge foundation they acquire through consistent use of the technology based Reading Bear program. Furthermore, our targeted intervention programs for ELLs include a school-wide implementation of Thinking Maps. Thinking Maps provide ELLs with visual supports for their thought processes. We are implementing them throughout the school to provide support and consistency for our ELL-SWDs across a variety of content areas such as ELA, Social Studies, and Science. 9  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In order to meet the mandates of the CR Part 154.2, the ENL program at Brooklyn Arbor has evolved from a pull-out model to a split standalone and integrated ENL model that consists of both pull-out instruction for Beginner ELL, as well as push-in instruction for Beginner, Intermediate and Advanced ELLs. Furthermore, the Dual Language program has grown to include 4th grade. The Dual Language program currently services grades K-4. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Our programs are continually being refined for greater academic success. While we are currently adapting and growing our ENL program model to meet the instructional mandates of the CR Part 154.2, we have yet to see the need to discontinue any ELL programs/services. Potential program changes may take place after the principal meets with ELL related staff for the end of year program review. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have equal access to all school programs and services at Arbor Elementary. ELL students participate in all classes (including technology, global arts, music, and wellness) equally with their English proficient peers. All written communications to, and conversations with, student families are translated into their home language in order to constantly raise awareness of all school related issues, events and offered services. All students at Arbor Elementary, including our ELL students, can receive a variety of supplemental services regardless of language barriers. These services include our Dual Language after school program and our ENL Newcomer program. In these programs, ELLs receive small group instruction on essential language and literacy skills. Furthermore, we intend to host a Satruday NYSESLAT academy this year, where ELLs of all classifications can receive small group instruction focused on exercises related to each of the four langauge modalities in preperation for their NYSESLAT examinations in the Spring. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELL students at Brooklyn Arbor have a variety of instructional materials, both in the ENL room as well as in their own classrooms, providing them language support on their journey from fear to fluency. No matter the level of their English Language ability, there are materials available to them that suit their learning needs. For example, Newcomers and Sife students explore English using language manipulatives and audio books with visual supports via laptops, ipads, or smartboards. Furthermore, Developing and Long Term ELLs develop literacy skills using Moving Into English textbooks, as well as the technology based Reading Bear phonics program and interactive National Geographic magazines. These are in addition to the many teacher-created tools, which include visual and language supports. We also have SmartBoards, Elmos, and Ipads available to all teachers to create interactive lessons that contain media such as graphics, video, and sound clips. Every classroom is equipped with computers for all teachers and students to utilize throughout the school day. Additionally, Home Language materials are also used to support ELLs as they progress toward bi-lingual fluency. Home Language labels, dictionaries, books, flashcards, songs and digital media are incorporated throughout lessons to provide necessary home language support. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our ELLs participate in an ENL program designed with their home language taken into consideration. For example, students who speak the same language are paired during group or partnership work during lessons. Whenever possible, parents are provided with translated versions of all materials that are distributed. Furthermore, 25% of the curriculum engages our students in their native language. Whether it is singing a song in Spanish, doing a read-aloud with a Spanish Language book, or 0  presenting an article on the rainforest in Spanish for our students to engage in grade level content, Home Language support is designed into the curriculum that guides our ELLs not to replace their language with English, but to become bilingual citizens of the world. At Brooklyn Arbor the dual-language program follows an alternating full-day model of language instruction. Students spend full days immersed in either English or Spanish. Over a ten day period, students spend five full days being instructed in Spanish and five full days being instructed by English, providing the required Native Language support for both ELLs and EPs. Our dual language classes are self-contained. We have one bilingual dual language class in each of the following grade levels: kindergarten, 1 st , 2 nd , 3rd, and 4th grades. Furthermore, many of the teachers, paraprofessionals and support staff speak Spanish, which is the main home language of our student population. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We ensure that required services support and resources correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels by employing the Fountas and Pinell system for leveling our books and matching students to their appropriate level via periodic running record assessments. Furthermore, our teachers are constantly looking for books that align with grade content as well as individual student interest in order to fully engage our learners and promote their enthusiasm for acquring new words, stories, and language abilities. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A - Our school does not share a building with another school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In the spring, parents of newly enrolled students are formally introduced to all key school personnel. Our newest students have the opportunity to visit the school and their future classrooms. Thus, before school begins parents and students have had a warm and informative introduction to our school. Students who arrive in the midst of an active school year are introduced to the students and staff by the school psychologist or parent coordinator (both of whom are bilingual). These students are assigned a "buddy" to help acclimate them to school routines, expectations, and culture. All newcomer students, no matter their age or grade level, are gifted a Newcomer binder. This binder includes a picture dictionary for the essential school staff and a map simplifying our school geography in order to ensure familiar faces and decrease confusion. The binder always comes with an array of worksheets and activities to help any overwhelmed and busy teacher, more easily begin incorporating their newcomer student into class work, while gauging and developing their newcomer student's language ability and vocabulary knowledge. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELLs are offered three language electives through our afterschool programs. Our Dual Language afterschool program provides continued language support and small group instruction for ELLs within the DL program. The Newcomer afterschool program, for ELLs who have been in the country for less than three years, provides small group instruction on essential language and literacy skills. Also, our Satruday NYSESLAT academy provides ELLs of all classifications small group instruction focused on exercises related to each of the four language modalities in preperation for their NYSESLAT examinations in the Spring. 18. For schools with dual language programs: 1  a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. Brooklyn Arbor has self-contained DL classes in K-4. ELLs and EPs are fully integrated throughout the instructional day. b. Each core content area is taught in both Spanish and English (reading, writing, science, social studies and word work). c. At Brooklyn Arbor the dual-language program follows an alternating full-day model of language instruction. Students spend full days immersed in either English or Spanish. Over a ten-day period, students spend five full days being instructed in Spanish and five full days being instructed by English. Our dual language classes are self-contained. d. Brooklyn Arbor follows a simultaneous model of literacy instruction. Students are taught early literacy skills in both languages simultaneously. Dual-language teachers are introducing students to literacy practices in their first language (whether that be English or Spanish) while simultaneously introducing these same skills in their second. Although the teachers' expectations are for their students to master one language before the other (depending on their native tongue), they are given the room and flexibility in the classroom to learn to read in two languages at once, even as they are still developing cognitive-oral skills in a second language. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development has been and will be ongoing for all teachers at Brooklyn Arbor Elementary. Common Branch, classroom, bilingual and ENL teachers all participate in Professional Developments specifically regarding our ELL population throughout the school year. The ENL and Dual Language teachers attend PD training in areas regarding technically specific aspects of servicing ELLs and their families as well as navigating ELL data. These include DOE run PD trainings such as "Using Data to Set Academic Goals for English Language Learners" and the "English Language Learner Parent Conference". Our ENL and DL teachers also regularly attend ELL focused PD trainings at Teacher's College. Current PD trainings listed for these staff members on our calendar include: Toolkits for Supporting Diverse Learners: Developing Data-Based Tools and Methods that help you adapt your workshop structures and upcoming units to provide potent help for kids with IEPs and all learners; Learn from a National Think-Tank on supporting English Language Learners in Reading and Writing units of Study; What you need to know about teaching foundational skills in Reading and Writing to ELLs; Assessing and Teaching Spanish speaking readers; Tapping into ELLs cultural and linguistic backgrounds in the LIteracy Curriculum; Shared Reading for ELLs. We also have a Teacher's College developer who is an ELL specialist who is working with our ENL and DL teachers, as well as our entire 2  teaching staff for a total of 10 full days in-house throughout the coming school year. She meets with all grades during weekly grade team meetings and does inquiry work around ELL student work. Furthermore, there are professional development planning periods at Brooklyn Arbor during which the ENL teacher, the Dual Language teachers and the classroom teachers meet, share, and plan in order to maximize English Language acquisition for our ELLs. During these PD planning periods, instructional strategies such as scaffolding, modeling, bridging, contextualizing, use of realia, schema building, graphic organizers, digital media, TPR (total physical response), role play and readers’ theatre – are discussed, explored, and adapted to meet the needs of specific students. The aim of the program is to increase English Language proficiency, develop academic language, and content area knowledge. There is concentration and scaffolding revolving around the four language modalities: Listening, Speaking, Reading, and Writing. By participating in these PD planning periods, the DOE run PD trainings, as well as Teacher's College trainings and collaborations, all of the teachers at Brooklyn Arbor (common branch, classroom, bilingual, ENL, Special-Ed etc.) will continue to learn and hone instructional strategies that promote ELL language acquisition. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Brooklyn Arbor ensures that 15% of the required professional development hours for all teachers are dedicated to language acquisition. In order to reflect the changes in the ENL program model to include Integrated ENL instruction, these professional developments include a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies as well as integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. Furthermore, all bilingual and ENL teachers have a minimum of 50% of their required professional development hours dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction. These professional developments also include a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies as well as integrating language and content instructions for ELLs. These professional development targets are reached by our ENL and Bilingual teachers through attendance to a variety of Teacher's College workshops and DOE PD trainings before turn-keying this information to the rest of the Brooklyn Arbor staff via lunch and learns and grade planning meetings. Notes from all trainings are typed and submitted to the administration. All PD records, including notes, agendas and attendance, are compiled and maintained by the Administration in the school's main office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Utilizing our Title III funds, Brooklyn Arbor organizes an ELL Parent/Teacher night with ELL related staff from both the ENL and Dual Language programs following February break and before the NYSESLAT examinations begin in the Spring. These 30 minute sessions between ELL Parents and teachers (with translation services provided by the Parent Coordinator Maria Molina when necessary) focus on each child's language development progress and needs in all content areas. During this time, the goals of the program, as well as the data from the child's language proficiency assessment results are reviewed and discussed. Parents and teachers are also encouraged to use this time to develop or refine at-home support plans for all ELLs. Attendance is recorded using existing procedures for Parent/Teacher nights. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 3  We take great pride in being a collaborative learning community. In order to ensure that our ELL parents are included in the Arbor Elementary community we provide parents with a series of workshops to keep them informed about important topics concerning their children and their learning journey at our school. Every year, we send home a survey to ELL parents in order to gather feedback about what workshop subjects they would find most beneficial in the school year to come. For example, this year, after reviewing our survey responses, we held both adult ENL classes and technology workshops for learning English with your child (or supporting your child's English Language Learning) through technology at home. Furthermore, the Dual Language program has a series of parent meetings throughout the year aimed at supporting parents of ELLs and SLLs. Our ENL teacher/ELL Coordinator, our Dual Language Coordinator and our bilingual Parent Coordinator are in regular contact with our ELL families to ensure that they always receive necessary translation services and can participate fully and comfortably in all school related events. The school provides free language translation services via school staff, parent volunteers or services offered by the DOE at all ELL related workshops and on parent conference days. Furthermore, all written communications are always translated into the home (or preferred) language of every Brooklyn Arbor family. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Home language and culture is continuously portrayed in students’ independent writing and presentations. There are a number of foreign language books also available for newcomers, and also for special projects. Students are encouraged to share their cultural knowledge with others. It’s essential to make sure the student knows his or her culture is of great importance. This philosophy is especially important in the ELL classroom. 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Eva Irizarry, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Brooklyn Arbor School DBN: 14k414 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Eva Irizarry Title Principal Cristina Albarran Assistant Principal Maria Molina Parent Coordinator Daniel Josiah Houston ENL/Bilingual Teacher Waldo Walle Parent Sara Yerry Emily Pryor Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Chaya Gahfi School Counselor Alicja Winnicki Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 14K414 School Name: Brooklyn Arbor Superintendent: Alicja Winnicki The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When children are registered (or within 30 days of a student's enrollment), the primary language spoken by the parent of each student is determined through information collected via ATS, Blue Card data, and individual teacher surverys throughtout grade classes. Once parents specify their preferred or primary language, this information is entered into ATS. The "Adult Preferred Language Report" is run to assess the language needs for the entire school. This information is shared with staff to ensure they make the appropriate plans to communicate most effectively with families. A report, updated periodically, is kept in the main offices that lists the languages parents speak, seperated by class and grade. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 7 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Approximately 26% of the parents specified that they require and prefer information and all forms of communication in Spanish. Other languages include: Hebrew, Mandarin, Cantonese, Japanese, German, Dutch, French, Arabic, Indonesian, Bengali, Italian 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Distributed at the beginning of the year: Parent Handbook, Family Calendar Distributed throughout the school year: Letters from School, After-school program information forms, PA Meeting Flyers, Event Flyers, tour flyers, Attendance Letters, etc. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 8  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? "Meet the Staff Night" on September 17 Parent Teacher Conferences (Fall and Spring) PreK and K Orientation in August "The Year Ahead Night" in June 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will post in a central location (at or near the main entrance) a sign in each of the covered languages indicating the availability of interpretation services. In addition, each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who requires language assistance will be provided with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Feedback is gathered at School Leadership Team Meetings and at PA Meetings. Parents also fill in yearly surveys wherein they communicate how their needs are met. We plan on reaching out to ELL parents at create a focus group 9  representing all cultures and languages represented in our school to gather feedback on our current system and brainstorm possible improvements to be implemented before the following school year. 0 
