 22K425 School Name: JAMES MADISON HIGH SCHOOL Principal: JODIE COHEN   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information James Madison High School 22K425 School Number (DBN): 330745 9 - 12 3787 Bedford Ave, Brooklyn, NY 11229 (718) 758-7200 (718) 758-7341 Fax: Jodie Cohen Jcohen9@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 22 Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent’s Email Address: Email Address: Jodie Cohen Maria Bucca Maryann Locicero Mary Juliano Jeanine Cerny Kathryn Hickey Aaron Dubin, Jr. N/A District Information Michael Prayor Superintendent: 1830 Shore Blvd. Brooklyn, New York 11235 mprayor@schools.nyc.gov 718-368-8515 (ext. 1118) Phone Number: 718-368-8517 Fax:   Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn South Cheryl Watson-Harris FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 415 89th street, Brooklyn NY 11209 CWatson21@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4900 Phone Number: 718-630-1820 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Jodie Cohen Colleen Kormann Maryann Locicero Jeansion Petithomme Jeanine Cerny Aaron Dubin, Jr. Kathryn Hickey Donna Tsentzelis Scott Swincicki Penny Hacken Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/ Member/parent Member/parent Member/ parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Mary Juliano Maxine Thomas Magdalena Moroz Joan Farrelly N/A N/A Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/UFT member/parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of James Madison High School is to engage, challenge, and educate the minds of our students. Our classroom communities inspire and encourage our students to ask questions, seek answers, and take an ownership role in their education. Our educators, staff, and students herald community connectedness within the walls of our schools itself and strive to give back to the communities around us. In our efforts to continue our growth as individuals, all members of James Madison High school ask, "What's next?" Our collective responses continue to shape us as individuals and grow our academic, athletic, and creative communities.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our school is a traditional large zoned city high school with 3,900 students from grades 9 through 12, with a small screened population. The school’s population is diverse with the following demographic breakdown: School Strengths and Accomplishments: We have 215 teachers and 85 additional staff members in various other supporting roles on staff- administrators, paraprofessionals, guidance and crisis counselors and aides. We boast a very high retention rate, with most staff members initiating their careers in and ultimately retiring from the same school community. Although our instructional program is broad, and our student population diverse, the adult learning community is strongly united. We collaborate in creating school goals, in creating pre-assessments and implementing them across curricula. Our curricula are organized around units of study developed by staff with student input. We perform inter-visitations, and share best practices electronically and through staff development. Every staff member is part of a collaborative team. Leadership is distributed so that staff members feel ownership and are given the power and capacity to affect important change and progress in our community. One of our teachers was a finalist in the Big Apple Awards, the city's recognition of teacher excellence. A number of our teachers are trained in AVID, and a majority implemented the use of Cornell Notes and other components of the AVID instruction model across curricula. The 2017-2018 school year was one filled with accomplishments for the James Madison High School community. The Law Institute continues to bring pride to JMHS. Our Moot Court and Mock Trial teams are some of the most competitive in the city, and have placed in state-wide competitions. Our We the People team is the best in the city. We are not just being hyperbolic when we say so. We have had students also earn distinction through the New York County Law Association and one student won first place in the WISE Quality of Life Competition. Several of our Law House juniors were accepted into the Intel program for their behavioral social science research projects. SING! Continues to be a celebrated tradition at Madison. Our student body also demonstrated its spirit and creativity in other ways throughout the year, participating in the Spring Musical performance which was also supported by Roundabout Theater as part of our school partnership program. This professional collaboration also provides for classroom residencies in English, Math, Science and Social Studies, incorporating performance art into the curricula. We have employed Roundabout teaching artists in our special education and ENL programs to promote rigor and student engagement. One of the outcomes of this collaboration is the "Oratory Olympics," in which ELLs perform recitations from the canon of English poetry and prose in front of an audience. We also hosted our fourth annual Shakespeare Festival this year. This event includes contributions from all disciplines to celebrate Shakespeare’s works. Our connections with our alumni association, and our bi-yearly induction of accomplished graduates on to our Wall of Distinction fosters a powerful model of citizenship for our students and helps reinforce our high expectations of them. Our girls' varsity basketball team, bowling team and rugby team won the city championships. The boys’ and girls’ track teams have moved quickly through the ranks this year, and are now officially the fastest in New York State. We are also highly placed in city competitions in wrestling, football, volleyball, softball and baseball. Our wresting team boasts 5 of the 10 top city finalists in the Mayor's Cup. Our stunt squad was identified as the city's "most spirited," and earned a monetary award to help build their program. We added many PSAL teams this past year to our athletic offerings making Madison the second largest PSAL program in New York City with 44 teams. The additions to an already massive PSAL program provided the students with a positive environment to spend their after-school hours. In addition to the social and emotional supports that teams provide, our coaches provide another layer of academic support for our students. Coaches regularly check in on their players' academic progress and many of our teams with traditionally at-risk students hold mandatory after-school study halls so that students can improve their academic achievement during the off-season and maintain eligibility in the coming season. Our partnership with the Athlife Foundation also provides an academic support system for our athletes. Since an important component of the program is the idea of the scholar-athlete, students are not eligible for any PSAL program unless they pass five classes and physical education and maintain a 75% average. This practice serves to underscore the importance of developing a well-rounded student. We are now in our second year collaborating with the Athlife Foundation. The "dream makers" 0  initiative, which has grown out of our collaboration with Athlife, has increased the number of student/counselor interactions among targeted student athletes four-fold leading to increased student achievement for our athletes. Our students have also earned distinction in arts and in academics. A number of our art students had work accepted in the 2017 Brooklyn Borough Arts Festival. We had art students place at PS Art and earn placements in the highly-coveted Fashion Design major at FIT, while many of our school musicians and singers participated in this year’s prestigious “Honors Music Festival for NYC High School Students.” Recently, we added "Modern Band," with plans to turn one of our classes into a "Global Classroom." The Global Classroom will also serve as an access center for students and teachers in need of multiple kinds of supports, and is being funded in part by capital grants from our local representatives and from funds raised by alumni. Students in our music program performed in the all-city Honors Band, and others were invited to perform in the Tunnel to Towers event in the fall. Our Robotics Club and Bio-Med House have similarly earned JMHS distinction by placing at the NYC Science and Engineering Fair and the Brooklyn College Science Expo, while our Information Technology (IT) House and Academy of Finance (AOF) garnered accolades at the South Brooklyn Invitational Mathematics Competition and prestigious summer internships for its students at Verizon. We had a number of students in the Math House who advanced in the AMC (AIME) Mathematics Competition. The James Madison High School graduating class of 2018 earned over $4.18 million in college scholarships! We have a number of students accepted into CUNY's MaCaulay Honors programs (including the prestigious Verrazano Honors Program at CSI), recipients of the Black Educator's Award from the governor's office in Albany, the Triple CCC Award from the nation's attorney genera, and the Presidential Academic Achievement Award. We are so proud of our students' accomplishments, and we are certain that 2019 will see similar excellence in its graduating class! We have also done impactful work in promoting the college and career readiness of our students. Students are encouraged to take College Level courses through our partnerships with: Kingsborough, Brooklyn College, St. Joseph's, and SUNY Downstate. Our student service group, Ladies of Substance, hosted a Career Day in March, during which local professionals from the surrounding community and many of our own alumni were invited to speak about their work experiences, and provide insights for students about the trajectories they might follow. We also continued working with Equal Opportunity Schools "Lead Higher" in conjunction with the Chancellor's AP for All initiative, during which all tenth and eleventh grade students were surveyed to determine both capacity and willingness in regard to participation in the AP program. An AP Fair was held in March in our library, to which all students were invited, and 345 attended and expressed interest in participating in our AP program which currently offers 19 AP courses. The targeted recruitment of new students to our AP program has eliminated our access gaps for students from traditionally under-represented populations. Our growing partnership with Follow Us To Success has provided students the opportunity to visit colleges and prepare for the SAT. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The student body includes 14% English Language Learners and 19% Special Education students. * Our English Language Learners have access to high level instruction that couples basic skill acquisition in reading, writing and speaking English with high level thinking. ENL teachers use students' prior knowledge and their skills in their native languages to introduce English content and provide opportunities to review learned concepts and build upon them. Teachers use daily assessments to determine student proficiency levels and tailor instruction to meet the needs of every student. ELLs are programmed for stand-alone ENL classes in addition to integrated ELA and History classes. In the integrated content classes, ELLs are given access to grade-level curricula with the support of an ENL teacher alongside the content instructor. Instruction is differentiated to meet the needs of students with diverse English proficiencies. In the Stand-alone classes, language acquisition instruction is couched in leveled readings and writings, and in real-life experiences that help student integrate their knowledge into their daily experiences and use it to succeed in their content classes. * Our Students With Disabilities are given support depending on their individual needs as determined by the IEP Committee comprised of a Special Education teacher, General Education teacher, student, guardian and related 1  service providers. IEP goals are closely monitored by students' Special Education and General Education teachers and students' progress is monitored and documented by their Special Education teachers. Needs vary widely among our Students With Disabilities, but Special Education teachers modify the general curricula with accommodations that provide multiple entry points to grade-level content. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Areas in which the school has demonstrated the most growth: Trust - Every Friday, one could walk into the building and see almost the entire staff wearing their school’s colors expressing their support of the Madison community. The change in culture has led to an increase in the daily attendance rate with an increase in the passing percentages across the board, we are currently at an 85%. Teachers have been creating new courses and programs and are constantly searching for opportunities beyond the school walls to further strengthen their professional practices. There is a culture of risk taking in our classrooms with more and more teachers willing to experiment instructionally because the cycle of observations at Madison are never punitive. Strong Family and Community Ties - In her position as Grant Writer/Public Relations Liaison for the school, Ms. Nanci Richard has been able to publicize significant school events and accomplishments. The community was consequently been able to celebrate these together. As a result, there has been significant increase of parental and community involvement in school events over the last year. The alumni association has also been an integral part of the fundraising program in the naming of Madison auditorium chairs and classrooms. One important grant we were awarded this year has allowed us to make strides in improving attendance amongst our LTAs. A significant component to our approach has been more pointed outreach, which has increased parent engagement. Looking forward, we plan to create initiatives that will provide professional development experiences for the parents of our students so that bolstering attendance is a collaborative effort between families and our school. These will include resume writing and interviewing skills clinics, which are being planned in conjunction with our professional partner, the Roundabout Theatre Company. This year, it is a significant goal of ours to continue to rigorously engage parents and families, and we will be instituting a parent share-fair and enrichment series to that end. Finally, our community and students currently benefit from a number of professional partnerships that support our academics, athletics programs, community service efforts, and arts initiatives. AVID and Follow Us to Success: Global Jetsetters, Rising Stars, Trailblazers help teach students the skills to be successful in high school. Students have exposure to careers through partnerships with National Academy of Finance, Arthur Ashe Institute, Cadwalader, Wickersham, and Taft, Justice Resource Center, We the People, and NYC Mentoring Program. Athlife, PSAL, and Marine Park Golf Course provide our students with opportunities to expand their exposure to sports. Wise Quality of Life, Relay for Life, Equal Opportunity Schools, Council for Unity, and Trex recycling give our students opportunities to think widely about how to give back to the world and community around them. Roundabout Theater Company supports arts learning in the English as a New Language Classes and Special Education classes, supports of Spring Musical Production, and gives students the opportunity to experience Broadway performances. Challenges and Key Areas of Focus: Rigorous Instruction -    Increase opportunities for students to self-asses and monitor their own progress . Increase the percentage of students who are taking AP classes. Increase the number of ELL and SWD students receiving an 80 or higher on Regents exams. 2  Strong Family and Community Ties - Increase and make more appealing the opportunities for parents, families and community members to attend parent/professional development programs and engage with our school community. Supportive Environment - Increase the number of offerings for students to be engaged in individual opportunities to provide social/emotional growth. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 22K425 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 3657 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 165 162 28 72 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 30 16 36 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 76.0% % Attendance Rate 67.4% % Reduced Lunch 14.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 17.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 44.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.08 0% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 87% 84% 79.2% 25.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO NO YSH NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES No N/A 451 385 23 93.6% 7.3% 15.0% 16.9% 19.8% 1.2% 18 7% 7.3 N/A N/A 90% 87% 87.0% 39% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A NO NO NO NO N/A NO NO YES YES N/A YES YES 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  The Enhanced Math classes have not been using previous student assessment data to inform instruction - the curricula was not aligned to the needs assessment.  Over 500 of our fourth year students have not received a grade of 80 or higher on a math regents.  In June, 2018 the passing percentage on the Algebra Regents was 59.6% Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through the use of in class self-assessments, students will enhance their skills resulting in an increase of 2% in the passing percentage on the Algebra Regents. 5 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers and Students Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers and students Teachers Sept 2018- June, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Leadership Program Apprentices Principal, Assistant Principals, Mentors, Leadership Program Apprentices Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Establish content-specific Regents teacher teams to identify then share findings and establish highest-leverage focus areas for students who did not achieve mastery and will retest. These areas of focus will inform questions and challenges posited by teachers to their students in Regents-bound classes. Use the inter-visitation model to showcase best practices and support growth of teacher capacity (and highlighting teachers who demonstrate high effectiveness in 3d). Monitor student assessments and create a centralized portfolio system evidencing student samples to support the inquiry process. Support the use of assessment in the classroom and establish a team to create curricula and work on school wide assessment criteria. Provide focused feedback with highest leverage next steps to teachers through the observation process in Domain 3. Use of ALEKS and Castle Learning to support the feedback and cycle of assessments in classes. Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through piloting the Equity team, we will be engaging parents on an unprecedented level, inviting them in to classrooms to learn about curricula, desired outcomes, strategies and their children's specific mastery levels. Additionally, we will continue to use Skedula/Pupil Path to articulate with all parents about class assignments and student progress and achievement. All teachers at James Madison High School employ Skedula/Pupil Path. Some also use Google classroom, as a way of broadening the classroom experience. Articulation with families will occur regularly throughout the entire academic year. 6  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Mathematics teachers will use ALEKS and Castle Learning to support the data analysis of student skills in class. The students will also be analyzing their individual data. Through self-assessment, students will be able to monitor their own progress and develop the habit of asking themselves What's Next? Teachers will also be using these systems in Project Support, Freshman Advisory and other Advisory Opportunities. Through the data sets, individualized paths will be created for both in class and after school tutoring. Additionally, the school will purchase graphing calculators for all 9th graders who do not have their own. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Data from ALEKS, in class assessments and Castle Learning will be analyzed and used to revise curricula. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Advance, data base, Castle Learning and ALEKS reports as well as attendance sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? On the 2017-'18 Survey, 55% of Madison students responded positively to the questions regarding "Personal Attention and Support" as aggregated on the Quality guide - 8 percentage points below the citywide average. This statistic is an aggregate of the Survey questions "My teachers: help me catch up if I am behind. (57% positive); notice if I have trouble learning something (52% positive); give me specific suggestions about how I can improve in class (61% positive); explain things a different way if I don't understand something in class (61% positive); and notice when I am upset (42% positive)." Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through the implementation of Advisory Programs, students will be further supported in their individual social/emotional growth as evidenced by a 5% increase in responses in the "Personal Attention and Support" category of the Quality Guide. 8 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept 2018- June 2019 all students at James Madison High School All students Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal of Guidance/Security and General Education Teachers. Principal, Assistant Principal of Guidance/Security, deans, Guidance Counselors and Social Workers Principal, Assistant Principal of departments, Guidance Counselors, Freshmen Advisory coordinator Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Addition of Advisory program to support Freshmen, Sophomores, Juniors and Seniors in academic achievement, credit accumulation, goal actualization and college applications. Build on the success of the six mandated student/counselor meetings to include two mandated parent/counselor meetings per year. Support through the school-wide incentive program "Golden Tickets". Creating advisory positions to provide students with the opportunities to be involved in more individualized programs. Additional Guidance Counselor being added to the college office to support initiatives. All students with disabilities Sept 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the academic year families will be invited in once a month for breakfast with the principal and a walk through of the instructional program. Monthly meetings will be scheduled for a targeted grade of students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy and Title I School Wide funds to support Freshman Advisory position and Advisory classes in all grade levels. Funding to support incentives for the "Golden Ticket" store. A citywide grant to support two Social Workers in the school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 9  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. STARS printout will evidence the number of students being supported in the programs. By January 2019, Advisory students will have generated portfolios of their work to prove proficiency in all of their classes. They will have completed an application to at least one college. Student survey in January gauging the success of the advisory programs and their impact on student support. Use of mid-year data from interactions database to create a comparison between the students' attendance and academic success to the counselors logs. Using the cycles of inquiry, the guidance team will look at the data and its correlation with academic growth. By March 2019, student attendance sheets will be collected to identify students not being serviced. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Analysis of data from in-house data base that shows student involvement in activities and updated through the Golden Ticket distribution. Attendance sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the 2017-2018 school year, the number of ENL teachers in our school increased by 15%. Through this increase, the opportunities for ELL students also increased. With all of these students, the number of students in this population is still relying on the safety nets to graduate. The specialized population needs to be further encouraged to reach for a grade of 80 or higher. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the effectiveness of teacher-partners' instruction in ENL Team Teaching classrooms will improve as measured by a 2% increase in these students earning an 80 or higher on June 2019 Regents exams. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will be supported to use data and assessments to identify content, skills, and standards not mastered and monitor learning progressions to move students towards proficiency in these areas. Teachers will use this data to inform their action research and improve language objectives going forward. Professional development opportunities will be created to provide provide teachers with different models of team teaching to better meet the needs of the various levels of ELLs in each classroom. ENL Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 ENL Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Leverage partnerships with Roundabout Theater and Repertorio Espanol to build teacher capacity to differentiate instruction and turn-key best-practices to the staff. All teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Inter-visitation and model team-teaching pairs to use as part of a series of team-teacher-led professional development workshops on effective models for team teaching. ENL Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Supervision, Teachers and PD team Principal, Assistant Principals, Supervision, ENL teachers. Principal, Assistant Principals, Supervision, Teachers and PD team Principal, Assistant Principals, Supervision, Teachers and PD team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to multiple share-fares throughout the year to celebrate student growth. Parent workshops will be created to educate parents on the curricula that their children are being exposed to in the classroom - empowering parents to support their children at home with their academics. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2  Training for the use of IO Assessment. Per session funding for teachers to run after school workshops to support parents. SBO to support the work of the Teacher Teams and provide time for teachers to work collaboratively. Prep period coverages to support intervisitation model. Addition of Assistant Principal of English to support ESL.. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, mock regents exams will be given to gauge student progress. By February 2019, ENL Teachers will create portfolios to create - "What's Next?" goals for individual students. Teacher team folders and Google Drive documents will demonstrate the evaluation of the use of data in the classroom to inform instruction. Furthermore, teacher leaders will monitor and support teacher-team work. Members of the SPDT will work with individual departments to support data needed for teacher team inquiry. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Skedula, PD Team records of workshops given, Sharepoint documents, teacher-team folders and analysis of student growth due to inquiry cycle. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Over the past three years, 70 new members have been introduced to our school community. Through mentoring, the teachers have been supported as well as monthly new teacher meetings with the principal. The addition of an individual who can bring all of the variables together is greatly needed. The untenured teachers need further guidance and individualized support to help them to grow. The majority of the new teachers are in the Special Education department and the passing percentages in classes of Special Education students was significantly lower then the school average. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through the implementation of a mentor teacher position un-tenured teachers of Special Education will be further supported therefore resulting in a 2% increase in passing percentages of Students With Disabilities classes. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Un-tenured teachers will be supported through an inquiry cycle utilizing their individual MOTP data and student reflection sheets Un-tenured teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals and mentor coordinator. Principal, mentor coordinator and Assistant Principals Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals Development of structures that support adult development centered around student achievement. The professional development team and the mentor coordinator will create menus that will support adult learning. Through the partnership of the members of the community, the team will participate in the inquiry cycle to support the instructional community. Teachers will conceive of, organize and facilitate professional development meetings, participate on and manage committees, including the New Teacher Induction Committee and the Hiring Committee. Focus on SWDs. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Each month parents will be invited in for breakfast with the principal where they will be given the opportunity to informally meet with the principal and other members of administration. Separate programs will be created for parents of SWDs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Purchasing of professional literature through Tax Levy Funding. Per diem and per session funded through tax levy and grants will provide support opportunities for teachers to participate in "adult development" opportunities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 5  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, each un-tenured teacher will review their portfolio to evidence the impact the program has had on their professional growth. Mid year grade check for Students With Disabilities classes. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Evaluation and feedback sessions to evaluate individual teacher growth. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The number of parents completing surveys grew from 18% to 43% this year. With the growth in this number, 38% of the families said that they do not have the opportunity to volunteer in their child's school. In order to provide further opportunities for the families, we need to create programs targeted at the parent's needs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, more of our families will partner with us in the education of our students as measured by a 10% increase in attendance at monthly PTA meetings. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Senior parent workshops that will support the parent and the child through the college application process. Senior parents Sept 2018- June 2019 Develop a menu of opportunities for parents to volunteer in school activities. Invite parents to expand the list and create further opportunities. all parents Sept 2018- June 2019 Create a schoolwide calendar of activities that will be disseminated in September to allow parents to make arrangements to support their children. all parents Sept 2018- June 2019 Monthly focused PTA meetings to support cohorts of students and parents. Provide incentives for the students to attend the meetings with their parents. Mental Health First Aid training for parents through the Mayor's Office. all parents Sept 2018- June 2019 Four parent dinners to provide the parents with opportunities to sit down to a meal with guidance counselors to discuss academic progress and "What's Next?" all parents Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Guidance, College Office team and Guidance Counselors Principal, Assistant Principals, parents Public Relations coordinator and parent coordinator. Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, all teachers. Principal, Assistant Principals, House Coordinators, parent coordinator, Professional partnerships, parents and community leaders Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors, Professional partnerships, parents and community leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A 8  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy and Title I Funding to support and maintain school’s website to document all events, Per-session to support creation of parent events and OTPS funding to support new events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in attendance at PTA events. There will also be a master list of parents who are in attendance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance records from meetings and survey feedback data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Below proficient scores on 8th grade ELA exam and confirmed with below grade-level assessment on a basic reading skills inventory Below proficient scores on 8th grade mathematics exam Failing scores on the Living Environment Regents Failing scores on theGlobal Studies Regents Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Double period literacy classes focusing on the 7 habits of effective readers Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group and pull- outby a licensed Orton GilhamTeacher When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) A double=period of English instruction during the school day and after school tutoring. Math Skills support class focusing on the foundational skills necessary to reach proficiency in Algebra I Targeted tutoring after school day and during lunch periods Tutoring before and after school day Additional Social Studies course to work on skills Blended learning, small group instruction, ALEKS, programmed class during the school day and after school programmed class during the school day and after-school tutoring programmed class during the school day, after-school tutoring and on Saturdays pull-out, peer and teacher tutoring Skills enrichment in slower paced instruction Tutoring both in small groups and one-to-one. Skills-based class in which the curriculum is tailored to skills deficiencies as determined by data analysis of the failed Regents. 0  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Student counseling sessions and intakes. Support discussions and literature Small group and one on one During the school day and after school 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 147 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. One on one and group counseling. School supplies and snacks are also provided. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Building leaders perform needs assessments based on roster projections and student credit requirements to determine the number of vacancies they have in each department and what content area the vacant position must be licensed in. We advertise all vacancies on both Open Market and through the New Teacher Finder. Additionally, we work with local colleges and universities as well as the Teaching Fellows program to find HQTs. Hiring committees comprised of teachers and building leaders hold several rounds of interviews and rate applicants on a rubric that prioritizes a candidates license area. To retain HQTs, new staff to Madison are buddied with more senior members to support their acclimation to the school community. Additionally, our teacher-led New Teacher Induction Committee facilitates the assimilation of new teachers into our community with frequent meetings and e-mailings. The principal holds monthly training meetings with new teachers to support their growth and make the school's expectations of them transparent. Additionally, there is a schedule of inter-visitations giving new teachers the opportunity to visit and observe master teachers and introduce them to our culture of open classrooms and adult learning. Similarly, their mentors will visit their classrooms frequently and offer low-risk, high-leverage feedback to help develop their practice. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We have an extensive monthly calendar of PD that is revised and revisited based on observation data as well as staff input. The principal holds widely attended New-Teacher Meetings that focus on improving instructions and making expectations of teacher practice clear. The Professional Development Committee (PDC) has identified five learning paths for teachers to choose from in the upcoming year. The learning paths were chosen using our CEP goals and once a teacher chooses a learning path, the will engage in PD once a month on that topic for the five months of the fall term. Additionally, our teacher team work is being modified to utilize action research and so before each teacher team meeting, teachers will engage in personal PD by reading the available research surrounding their teacher teams' action research question. 4  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher teams will be creating inquiry questions. In the team, they will also be researching articles related to their inquiry to further support their investigation. Throughout the year, Teacher Teams engage in an inquiry (developed using data from the baseline) and analyze data weekly from student work to see if instructional strategies have been impactful on student achievement. End-of-term assessments are used in Teacher Teams to measure student learning and make final decisions regarding the adjustment of curricula to include successful strategies or modifications. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount 5  each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) X N./A N/AX X X Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 2,353,433 N/A 65,486 45,051 22,746,817 X N/A X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 6   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy James Madison High School agrees to implement the following statutory requirements: o The school will put into operation programs, activities and procedures for the involvement of parents, consistent with section 1118 of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). Those programs, activities and procedures will be planned and operated with meaningful consultation with parents of participating children. o The school will ensure that the required school-level parental involvement policy meets the requirements of section 1118(b) of the ESSA, and includes, as a component, a school-parent compact consistent with section 1118(d) of the ESSA. o The school will incorporate this parental involvement policy into its school improvement plan. o In carrying out the Title I, Part A parental involvement requirements, to the extent practicable, the school will provide full opportunities for the participation of parents with limited English proficiency, parents with disabilities, and parents of migratory children, including providing information and school reports required under section 1111 of the ESSA in an understandable and uniform format and, including alternative formats upon request, and, to the extent practicable, in a language parents understand. o The school will involve the parents of children served in Title I, Part A programs in decisions about how the 1 percent of Title I, Part A funds reserved for parental involvement is spent. o The school will be governed by the following statutory definition of parental involvement, and will carry out programs, activities and procedures in accordance with this definition: 8  o Parental involvement means the participation of parents in regular, two-way, and meaningful communication involving student academic learning and other school activities, including ensuring  that parents play an integral role in assisting their child’s learning;  that parents are encouraged to be actively involved in their child’s education at school;  that parents are full partners in their child’s education and are included, as appropriate, in decision-making and on advisory committees to assist in the education of their child; the carrying out of other activities, such as those described in section 1118 of the ESSA.  The school will inform parents and parental organizations of the purpose and existence of the Parental Information and Resource Center in the State. II. Description of How School Will Implement Required Parental Involvement Policy Components 1. James Madison High School will take the following actions to involve parents in the joint development of the District Parental Involvement plan (contained in the RDCEP/DCEP Addendum) under Section 1112 – Local Educational Agency Plans of the ESSA: LIST ACTIONS 2. James Madison High School will take the following actions to involve parents in the process of school review and improvement under Section 116 – Academic Assessment and Local Educational Agency and School Improvement of ESSA: i. Invite parents on a regular basis to attend school planning meetings translated into the major languages ii. Coordinate with the executive board of the PTA to plan school initiatives iii. Regular agenda items at the SLT meetings 3. James Madison High School will provide the following necessary coordination, technical assistance, and other support in planning and implementing effective parental involvement activities to improve student academic achievement and school performance: (List activities.) i. Six report cards a year ii. Use of phone messenger, Skedula, Naviance and school’s website and social media platforms iii. Regular mailings to the parents iv. Increased involvement in city wide programs LIST ACTIONS 4. James Madison High School will coordinate and integrate parental involvement strategies in Title I, Part A with parental involvement strategies under the other programs: i. Title III 9  ii. CASA Arts Grant iii. Alumni Association support iv. Arthur Ashe Academy v. NAF vi. Justice Resource Center vii. RESO A grant funding to increase technology in the classroom LIST ACTIONS 5. James Madison High School will take the following actions to conduct, with the involvement of parents, an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parental involvement policy in improving the quality of its Title I Part A program. The evaluation will include identifying barriers to greater participation by parents in parental involvement activities (with particular attention to parents who are economically disadvantaged, are disabled, have limited English proficiency, have limited literacy, or are of any racial or ethnic minority background). The school will use the findings of the evaluation of its parental involvement policy and activities to design strategies for more effective parental involvement, and to revise, if necessary (and with the involvement of parents) its parental involvement policies. LIST ACTIONS SUCH AS: ● Walk-through of the school’s programs by members of all constituencies. III. Adoption This School Parental Involvement Policy has been developed jointly with, and agreed on with, parents of children participating in Title I, Part A programs, as evidenced by Jeanine Cerny. This policy was adopted by the James Madison High School on 09/26/18 and will be in effect for the period of one year. The school will distribute this policy to all parents of participating Title I, Part A children on or before November 28, 2018. Principal’s Signature: Jodie Cohen Date Wednesday, September 26, 2018 Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students James Madison High School will build the parents’ capacity for strong parental involvement, in order to ensure effective involvement of parents and to support a partnership among the school involved parents and the community to improve student academic achievement through the following activities specifically described below: a. The school will provide assistance to parents of children served by the school, as appropriate, in understanding topics such as the following, by undertaking the actions described in this paragraph – i. The State’s academic content standards; 0  ii. CCLS; iii. The State and local academic assessments including alternate assessments, the requirements of Part A, how to monitor their child’s progress, and how to work with educators: LIST ACTIONS SUCH AS: ● Purchasing software for ELL students ● Calculators for the Mathematics department ● Chart and art supplies to further prepare our students for art competitions ● Musical Instruments to enhance our ever growing music programs ● Chromebooks to enhance instruction and the teacher’s ability to further James Madison High School will provide materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their children’s academic achievement, such as literacy training, and using technology, as appropriate, to foster parental involvement by: Parental Involvement and School Quality - increasing the capacity for communication on our school’s website - Use of Skedula - use of Phone Messenger Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement James Madison High School will, with the assistance of the district and parents, educate its teachers, pupil services personnel, principals and other staff in how to reach out to, communicate with and work with parents as equal partners, in the value and utility of contributions of parents, and how to implement and coordinate parent programs and build ties between parents and schools by: - attending regular meetings and turn-keying to the school community James Madison High School will take the following actions to ensure that information related to the school and parent-programs, meetings and other activities, is sent to parents of Title I participating children in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon request, and, to the extent practicable, in a language the parents can understand: - translation into multiple languages - use of school’s website - backpacking home notices School-Parent Compact (SPC) 1  School-Parent Compact (SPC) James Madison High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 3  ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: In an attempt to offer additional support to English Language Learners (grades 9 through 12) toward meeting higher diploma requirements, promotional standards and the Common Core Learning Standards, we shall offer a Title III After-School NYSESLAT Preparation Program, a Title III After-School ENL/Social Studies Program, an intensive ENL, ELA and ENL content-area tutoring program and a Title III Saturday Academy for ENL/Social Studies. The programs will serve approximately 513 English Language Learners. The After-School Program will begin the week of October 1, 2018. NYSESLAT classes will be held Monday through Thursday, ENL/Global classes will be held on Tuesdays and Thursdays and ENL/U.S. History classes will be held on Mondays and Wednesdays. The programs will run until Regents week in June 2019. Intensive tutoring classes will be held twice a week for one month before the January 2019 Regents and one month before the June 2019 Regents. The Saturday Academy will run for fifteen weeks, four hours for each session beginning on September 22, 2018 and ending on January 19, 2019. In recent years there has been a tremendous influx of students from Uzbekistan, Georgia and rural areas of China. These students are in need of intensive skills development in English. In order to accommodate the needs of ELLs who are not making gains on the NYSESLAT, especially in reading and writing which have been identified as the weakest modalities, we will offer NYSESLAT preparation four times a week. Teachers will use specific instructional modifications as well as targeted pedagogical strategies to accelerate the academic achievement and English acquisition of ELLs. Teachers will use Common Core aligned ENL curricula and follow the UDL Guidelines. They will use teacher-prepared materials and NYSESLAT preparation materials. The program will enable teachers to accommodate to all levels of students and to help long-term ELLs make gains on the NYSESLAT. For those not meeting with success on the ELA Regents Examination we will hold intensive sessions twice a week for one month prior to the ELA Regents in January and in June. In addition, students will be programmed into Regents prep classes and will also receive instruction in integrated classes in ELA and Social Studies. We have identified Social Studies as the critical needs area for ELLs because they experience difficulty in accessing the dense content of the discipline. Historically, ELLs' failure to meet the Standards in Social Studies has prevented them from meeting graduation requirements. We will offer Global History and Geography twice a week and U.S. History and Government twice a week. We are going to target ELLs who have not met with success on one or both Social Studies assessments. ELLs will have the opportunity to use an online component to the program with the assistance of teachers. They will use the Chromebooks to supplement the computers we already have to support this program. We will also offer intensive sessions in English and Social Studies twice a week for one month prior to the Regents in January and June. We intend to offer a Saturday blended program for students who need to be prepared for the Global or U.S. Regents or both and for students who need to earn Social Studies credit. The sessions will be taught by fully licensed content-area teachers with the support of ENL teachers, the Assistant Principal, ENL and the Assistant Principal, Social Studies. Teachers are trained through Title III Professional Development funding in the following areas: sensitivity to this 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information population, alignment of ENL curricula to the CCLS, UDL Guidelines for differentiation and ENL strategies and methodologies. Students will also use the Chromebooks to support the program. We will also need chart paper, paper, notebooks, review books, pens, highlighters, folders for portfolios, binders and chart paper. A new computer lab was installed for the Fall 2016 term to supplement the availability of technology for the ELLs to facilitate the use of on-line instructional materials and is still in use. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: At Madison, we offer a strong professional development program for staff serving English Language Learners. It is an ongoing and comprehensive plan consisting of interdisciplinary teacher academies. Teachers, Guidance Counselors and Assistant Principals share research-based Bilingual/ENL methodologies and practices in order to enhance English Language Learners’ performance in ENL, ELA and integrated content-area classes (as mandated by Federal Legislation) and their performance on the NYSESLAT and Regents Examinations. Additionally, this year we are offering PD workshops to our faculty in UDL practices, team teaching methodologies, responsive instruction, the global classroom and social emotional growth. ENL teachers will explore these topics through the lens of ELL education. Each topic will be an in depth exploration over five separate sessions so that teachers will have more than just a superficial, one-off PD. Teachers will have time to explore their learning more deeply to better internalize and implement their new skills. Internal PD dates for the fall term are: 9/21, 10/19, 11/16, 12/21 and 1/18. In addition to those dates, consultant coaches will visit the classrooms of the teachers in the team teaching learning path on 10/1, 10/25, 11/19, 12/17 and 1/8. We have also brought in an F-Status AP World Languages and ENL to support our teachers of ELLs. Teachers who were rated less than Effective on their 2017-18 year-end MOTP, meet with Dr. DiLorenzo weekly and she routinely visits their classes to observe their practice and later offer feedback, guidance and planning support. ENL teachers as well as content teachers in the integrated classroom will be scheduled to attend the various Professional Development workshops offered by our Borough Support Office on a monthly basis as well as PD offerings which are applicable which are offered by DELLS. Social Studies Teacher and ENL Teacher: 10/11, 11/7, 12/11, 2/12, 3/12, 4/3 Science Teacher and ENL Teacher: 10/12, 11/9, 12/14, 2/8, 3/15, 4/9 Math Teacher and ENL Teacher: 10/23, 11/14, 12/18, 2/15, 3/13, 4/10 ELA Teacher and ENL Teacher: 10/26, 11/13, 12/6, 2/8, 3/28, 4/29 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration  topics to be covered 7  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities  name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: Parents of ELLs need to be provided with appropriate information so that they can make informed decisions and choices regarding their children's educations. Parents are informed of important events and meetings through multilingual letters, informational bulletins and phone messenger in targeted languages. At James Madison High School we have a strong ELL Parent Involvement Program. In addition to mandated CR Part 154 parent Orientation Meetings the school holds multilingual parent meetings throughout the year to explain parent choice with regard to ESL/Bilingual Programs, school and graduation requirements, testing requirements and accommodations, the Discipline Code, etc. Additionally, we hold Title III Parent Education Sessions throughout the year. There will be four Title III Parent Education Sessions held throughout the year, one hour prior to the scheduled PTA meetings to maximize the participation of parents of ELLs at important parent meetings. The sessions will be multilingual and parents will be provided with multilingual resources and materials. The topics and dates of Parent Education Sessions are: • Preparing English Language Learners and their Parents/Guardians to Use Pupil Path/SKEDULA and information on credit accumulation and graduation requirements October 17, 2018 5:30 p.m. - 7:00 p.m. • Preparing English Language Learners for College and Careers-NAVIANCE training and FAFSA November 14, 2018 4:30 p.m. – 5:30 p.m. • Preparing English Language Learners for the NYSESLAT February 13, 2019 5:30 p.m. – 7:00 p.m. • Preparing English Language Learners for Regents prep, summer offerings, summer employment opportunities, summer school. May 15, 2019 5:30 p.m. - 7:00 p.m. We have arranged that all meetings be held on the nights of Parent Teacher Meetings and the Title III Professional Development Meetings so that staff can facilitate. Additionally, translators will assist parents. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services 8  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 22 School Name James Madison High School Borough Brooklyn School Number 425 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jodie Cohen Coach Roseann Torre, ELA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Dawn Schwaber Teacher/Subject Area Lorraine Deacy Teacher/Subject Area Frank Costa Related-Service Provider Maria Bucca, UFT Superintendent Michael Prayor Assistant Principal Avi Dachs Coach Raquel Fernandez, Bilingual Sp School Counselor Nataliya Chernikova Parent Irene Rodriguez Parent Coordinator Rita Troiso Field Support Center Staff Member Aaron Perez Other (Name and Title) Olivia Duran, A.P, Special Edu C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 9 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 3581 0 Total number of ELLs 513 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 14.33%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish & Russian If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. Spanish TBE Russian School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2018-2019 2018-2019 K 1 0 0 TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Tot # 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 2 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our stand-alone ENL curricula is couched in the NYSESLAT standards for reading writing, listening and speaking while also being aligned to the Common Core standards for ELA. The school uses teacher-created performance-based assessments of students' learning as part of our classroom instruction and everyday tasks to assess ELLs' language proficiency and academic achievement. These assessments of ELL language proficiency and progress include oral reports, presentations, demonstrations, written assignments, and portfolios. Common, periodic assessments are embedded in our curricula to help teachers plan their units responsively to the needs of their students. The curricula offers a multitude of extensions, opportunities for review, modifications to texts, additional practice and supplementary texts that allow teachers to tailor instruction based on the results of their assessments. 1  Our pedagogy also dictates that there be checks-for-understanding throughout lessons and that lesson plans allow for flexibility following those formative assessments. Our assessments often include processes such as several drafts of a writing sample or collaborative projects. We use teacher- and student-created rubrics as well as observation checklists to evaluate and move our students toward academic achievement. These assessment tools help document our ELLs' growth over a period of time and modify our instruction based on the needs of our learners. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our ENL teacher teams are constantly engaged in a cycle of inquiry that reviews student work, analyzes data and recommends modifications to the curricula based on their findings. We currently contract an F-status ENL assistant principal, Dr. DiLorenzo, to review these recommendations and reconstruct our curricula based on the teacher team findings. In this way, our curricula remains a living document that is ever-changing along with the needs of our students. Dr. Dilorenzo also works with teachers of ELLs to make their instruction accessible to ELLS of various proficiency levels. She visits classrooms, conferences with teachers, inter-visits alongside them, and coaches them to elevate their instructional practice and improve academic achievement among our ELLs. Our Access Center also offers our students a place to explore their talents and find alternative routes to demonstrate their learning. The facilitator of the Access Center reviews student assessments and collaborates with teachers to find alternate assessment routes for our ELLs to demonstrate their proficiency in a content without being hamstrung by their limited English proficiency. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) is the foundation upon which we build our ELL instruction. The EDAT compiles biographical data next to assessment data from the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, and statewide exams. Teachers us the EDAT to determine students' levels of proficiency in the various components of language and their greatest areas of need in content-area support. Teachers use data trackers and periodic assessments to measure progress towards NYSESLAT and Common Core goals. Use of the EDAT as a baseline assessment tool allows teachers to focus on progress toward attainable goals and also allows teacher teams to analyze data that pertains to subgroups of ELLs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Our primary mode of support is our formidable tutoring program. Title III Saturday School and PM school is offered in a variety of histories, sciences, and maths in addition to language acquisition classes. Additionally, our ELL Coordinator ensures that every ELL student receives a direct translation dictionary in his or her HL and that content teachers of ELLs have access to the DOE created academic vocabulary glossaries for their contents. We have laptop carts that circulate through the department to support students ability to learn at their own pace and with the support of online translation tools. Not only do we offer integrated co-taught classes to our ELLs in ELA and in their social studies classes, but we also use assessment data to program ENL support teachers into math and science classes with the greatest needs of language support. Our Access Center is a hub of creative achievement where students who struggle to show their academic achievement on traditional assessments can go to demonstrate their learning in creative ways including multi-media presentations and musical compositions. Our partnership with Roundabout Theater brings trained educational consultants into our ENL classrooms and utilizes the techniques used in dramatic theater to engage students in their learning. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Much of the information necessary is obtained from the EDAT. The anecdotal information contained in the EDAT is especially helpful in determining the students' needs. Student programming decisions are made based on NYSITELL and NYSESLAT data, and the additional, non-mandated ENL teacher programming into content area classes is done using Regents exam data. 2  Additionally, we use Regents data to make decisions on which students to program for summer school enrichment classes, PM School and Saturday School to accelerate their growth in preparation to retake Regents exams. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? All teachers are given access to relevant EDAT data through our shared Google Drive. Additionally, every September, teachers of ELLs take part in PD that unpacks the EDAT and gives teachers the time to scrutinize its data. We have a guidance counselor designated specifically for ELLs who ensures that every ELL is programmed for appropriate classes and is being supported with ENL instruction for the mandated number of minutes according to his or her proficiency level. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In accordance with CR-Part 154 Regulations for ENL, Grades 9 to 12 Entering and Emerging students are enrolled in three units of ENL: One Integrated ENL/ELA class with the support of an ENL teacher paired with an ELA teacher (or a single dually licensed ENL/ELA teacher); one unit Integrated ENL with a content-area class (social studies or science) also with the support of an ENL teacher paired with a content teacher; and one unit of Stand-alone ENL totalling more than 600 hours per week. When numbers permit, we offer separate Stand-alone classes with disparate curricula to entering students and to emerging students. Similarly when numbers allow, we offer separate Stand-alone classes to students at different grade levels but when need arises, we will only combine students who are separated by one year. At the Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding levels, our students are programmed for one unit of an Integrated ENL/ELA class with the support of an ENL teacher paired with an ELA teacher (or a single dually licensed ENL/ELA teacher). This constitutes more than 200 minutes per week. All minutes of instruction are well-beyond the CR-Part 154 mandate due to the programming structure of a high school. As per CR Part-154, no classes exceed two grade levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. This year we plan on opening a TBE program in Spanish and Russian. Students in these programs will receive Stand-alone instruction and Integrated ENL instruction in ELA according to the criteria detailed in (a) above, but will also be instructed in living environment and global studies in HL. Additionally, students in the TBE program will receive a course in HL instruction. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As explained in section above, all students are programmed in excess of what is required by CR Part 154 as to the number of minutes of instruction. All ELL students, regardless of proficiency level, are programmed for five units or periods per week of ENL/ELA taught by either a dually certified ELA/ENL teacher or co-taught by an ELA and an ENL certified teacher. All Entering and Emerging students receive five units or periods per week of Stand-Alone class taught by a certified ENL teacher as well as five units or periods of Integrated ENL in the content area such as social studies or science, which is taught by a certified 3  content teacher and a certified ENL teacher. Our designated guidance counselor for ELLs ensures that these protocols are adhered to and our ELL Coordinator double checks the programs of all ELLs. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. English and Social Studies are delivered in English through co-teaching with a certified content and certified ENL teacher and is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. The curricula are common core aligned with modifications for ELLs made through teacher team inquiry. Lesson planning is done collaboratively with special consideration given to both content and language objectives, content and academic vocabulary, cultural awareness, on-going formative assessment mechanisms, scaffolding methodologies, differentiated instruction methodologies, medial summaries, final summaries and extensive use of graphics, visuals and realia. Many of our Math and Science integrated ENL classes are also supported with certified ENL teachers whenever possible. ENL teachers are primarily programmed for the Math and Science classes with Entering or Emerging students with special consideration given to classes that end in Regents exams. Curricula is similarly modified in these classes as needed for students with limited English through teacher team inquiry while maintaining the rigorous standards dictated by the Common Core and our own school-wide high expectations for all of our learners. Our F-status assistant principal of ENL and World Languages coaches these content teachers on best practices for teaching ELLs and differentiation methodologies for students with limited English proficiency. Teachers implement scaffolding and differentiation to enhance ELLs' access to the instructional program and accelerate their English language acquisition. Bilingual dictionaries and content area word-for-word translation glossaries are available. Furthermore, tutoring is offered in every subject and students are continuously referred by teachers or encouraged to participate. Computer carts are routinely used to give students access to the Internet and its translation tools. Native language support is provided, when possible through ancillary resources, our bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, ENL appropriate textbooks, and through the implementation of a "buddy system" when more proficient students speaking the same language are paired with struggling students to serve as resources. We are also introducing the STAR program (Student Teacher-Assistants as Resources) which sends outstanding multilingual students into content classes to work as teacher assistants and improve ELL comprehension. We are also beginning a bilingual program for Spanish and Russian in our 9th grade Living Environment and Global History classes. When properly staffed, these classes will provide content instruction in students' HLs with some English. However, the proportion of HL to English will shift as the year continues, integrating more and more English into instruction as the year progresses and students become more proficient in English. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? In order to ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language we use data from our intake interviews and in-house student surveys to order appropriate numbers of state exams in students' home languages. Additionally, as classes that end in Regents begin to take practice exams, ENL teachers provide the translated versions of these exams for their students. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status At James Madison High School we differentiate instruction to enhance teaching and learning for all ELL subgroups. Each class is infused with academic rigor to promote higher-order thinking skills in our students. Teachers plan strategically in order to meet the needs of diverse learners. We make deliberate efforts to meet students where they are and offer challenging, appropriate options so that their unique needs will be met. Teachers modify the following curricular elements in response to learner needs--content, process, product and learning environment and set the tone and expectations of learning. We respond to student readiness, interest and learning profiles by conducting inventories (created by a teacher team in the ENL/ELA Departments). We differentiate primarily to provide access to learning, motivation to learn and efficiency of learning. Student 4  engagement is key. Since the various subgroups present a high degree of variation with regard to skill levels, social development, emotional development, background knowledge and physical needs, it is critical that we make every effort to differentiate instruction for these subgroups. All students are offered in-school tutoring, before and after-school tutoring, and Intensive Regents Tutoring in all content-area Regents Examinations. They also participate in Saturday classes. a. SIFE -- For our SIFE English Language Learners, we offer targeted instruction in ENL and content areas in the four language modalities. Students receive small group instruction that is scaffolded and teachers implement differentiated instructional strategies. The department maintains a selection of resources for teachers to select from which include but are not limited to textbooks, workbooks, adapted texts which are appropriate for SIFE as well as Entering and Emerging students. Audio-visual resources and Internet resources are also available. Texts are shortened, extensive vocabulary supports are provided, and written work products are required. Expectations of SIFE writing also varies according to the individuals with some SIFE able to write independently and others needing the support of a variety of receptive writing methodologies. Counseling is based upon individual needs. We offer Title III before and after-school instruction, pairing with more English proficient pairs, lunch-time tutoring and intensive tutoring in all subject areas. Parental outreach is conducted through the Translation Plan. Parents of students with interrupted formal education are provided with lists of local community agencies. Conferences among concerned staff are conducted to review student records and make recommendations for instruction. In addition, we offer meetings informing parents of graduation requirements and program requirements. b. Newcomers -- Small group instruction is used extensively. Teachers scaffold instruction that is infused with differentiated instructional methodologies. They are given co-teaching support and native language support through the implementation of a “buddy system” during ELA/ENL and ENL content-area classes and after school. In order to enhance teaching and learning for newcomers we make extensive use of audio-visual materials. We use adapted text where appropriate. Students are enrolled in Title III Saturday and after school programs as well as lunch time and targeted tutoring sessions. c. ELLs receiving service 4 to 6 years -- Those who have not met the performance standard in listening, speaking, reading or writing are, where possible, given small group instruction tailored toward the modalities, and instructional supports including NYSESLAT and ELA Regents preparation materials. Instruction is differentiated and vocabulary and grammar are taught in context. Students have the opportunity to take SAT preparation classes. d. Long-Term ELLs -- Conferences among concerned staff such as guidance counselors and ENL teachers are conducted to review student records and make recommendations for instruction. Teachers of long-term ELLs are also provided with differentiated instructional materials. All four language modalities are addressed. e. ELLs identified as having special needs-- English Language Learners identified as “Special Education” on their IEP are programmed for ENL instruction as per their IEP. They are provided with small-group differentiated instruction, related services as indicated on their IEP, extra support through Title III programs, and individualized counseling. English Language Learners are offered the following supports: instructional support in the four modalities, both within the school day and in the Title III programs, as well as small-group differentiated instruction in the ESL program and Title III programs in the content areas. They would be offered counseling based upon individual needs from their assigned guidance counselor. They are referred to outside agencies when in need of further interventions, individual or family. They will also benefit from the newly approved accommodations on the NYSESLAT. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? IEPs are accessible to teachers so that they can differentiate lessons to accommodate to students' needs. Additionally to pertinent instructional information, IEPs have been disseminated to teachers including testing accommodations and non-instructional services. They are provided with small group differentiated instruction, related services as indicated on their IEPs, SETSSs, ICT and extra support through Title III programs, and individualized counseling and speech. ELLs with disabilities are offered the following supports: instructional support in the four modalities, both within the school day and in the Title III programs, as well as small group differentiated instruction in the ENL program and Title III programs in the content areas. They are offered counseling based on their individual needs from their assigned counselor. They are referred to outside agencies when in need of further interventions - individual or family. The school does not maintain instructional materials that are specific to SWDs; however, the practice of using supportive technologies in the classroom is well developed among ISS teachers and so ELLs with IEPs will continue to receive the support of laptops and SMART board presentation of content in their ISS classes. 5  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We use curricular, instructional day scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. ELLs with disabilities are programmed for self-contained, SETSS or ICT classes in addition to their ENL mandates. Collaboration is built into the programming. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs receive the the support of certified ENL teachers in their ELA and Social Studies classes and the additional language acquisition support in their Stand-alone ENL classes. Integrated classes are co-planned for by both teachers, ensuring that every lesson has a language objective and a clear language acquisition outcomes in addition to the lesson's content objective. Lesson medial summaries, unit interim assessments, and smaller practical application of knowledge assignments help ENL teachers determine students' levels of mastery over class objectives. ENL teachers monitor ELLs progress' in achieving these objectives and conference with students to establish individualized language goals. ENL teachers create a learning profile for students along with their stand-alone teachers and share these insights with students' other content teachers. Based on these learning profiles, goals, and progress reports, students are directed to deeper intervention services. In order to prepare ELLs for the ELA Regents Examination we offer Regents prep classes for both on-track and off-track ELLs. We offer comprehensive targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, Social Studies and in Mathematics through tutoring programs as well as PM school. The Assistant Principals of Compliance/Foreign Language, English/ENL, Social Studies, Math, and Science meet periodically to assess the progress of ELLs and facilitate the implementation of interventions with teachers. Similar administrative collaboration takes place along with our dedicated ELL guidance counselors and ELL Coordinator to ensure appropriate programming for classes and for testing accommodations during State exams. We offer individual guidance sessions with students to review their transcripts, graduation requirements, and upcoming assessments. Parents are informed in writing (multilingual letters) of the dates and times of all Regents exams. Multilingual phone outreach is also conducted. We have a dedicated dictionary/glossary team that delivers and collects word-for-word dictionaries to every ELL testing room during State exams. In recent years we have purchased Georgian, Uzbek, Armenian, Burmese, French, Bengali, Punjabi and Haitian-Creole dictionaries to accommodate to the linguistic needs of newly-arrived immigrants speaking these languages. We continue to distribute Albanian, Chinese, Hebrew, Korean, Vietnamese, Russian, Spanish and Urdu dictionaries. We offer after-School tutoring in Chemistry, Earth Science and Living Environment specifically for ELLs and former ELLs as well as Global History and Geography and U.S. History. Intensive tutoring is also offered in all of the content-areas mentioned above. For all (non-ELA) content-area Regents exams we offer students the opportunity to use translated versions of the exams where available. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will be offering two TBE programs next year: one in Spanish and one in Russian to accommodate the needs of our most significant HL populations.We have purchased text books for the Stand-alone courses and rewritten the curriculum to include materials from those texts in addition to a multitude of ancillary texts that reflect common themes and language acquisition objectives.ENL teachers will be facilitating PD workshops for content teachers in how best to reach students with limited English proficiency.We will be implementing our STAR program (Student Teacher-Assistants as Resources) in which outstanding, multilingual students push-in to ELL content classes to bolster the teachers' abilities to communicate with students with limited English proficiency.We will be offering professional development workshops in various team teaching models to foster improved collaboration among our co-teachers.We have included more celebrations of home language and culture in the Stand-alone ENL curricula and will include more cultural celebrations as a department. The What's Next? Olympics will foster HL and cultural pride while instilling a growth mindset in our ELLs.We will expand our family engagement efforts and mobilize our ELLs' families to create monthly cultural celebrations. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 6  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. We ensure that ELLs are afforded equal access to the full range of school programs including tutoring, extended day, credit recovery, 40 clubs, sports activities, teams, Sing!, Spring Musicals, etc. To provide all students with access to the instructional programs and extracurricular activities, and to bridge cultural barriers, we have fortified our already established "house" system (in which students are programmed according to their needs, interest, and talents) by fostering a more collaborative community and by creating "model classrooms". Additionally, we will be renewing our partnership with Roundabout Theater Company which sends educational consultants to push into ENL classes and uses theatrical techniques to engage students in their learning. They also collaborate with our theater department to produce the Spring Musical. These collaborations have led to a disproportionate number of ELLs participating in the Spring Musical. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our common core aligned ELA curricula has just been modified for our Integrated ENL classes. The content objectives have remained intact, but the curricula has been bolstered by the addition of accessible text selections for students with limited English proficiency and with language objectives that correspond to the content objectives.Our entering and our emerging Stand-alone curricula have been rewritten with the addition of a new textbook and supportive comprehension and grammar workbooks. There are additional online resources - ancillary texts, enrichment activities, supporting videos, translation services - that are written into the curricula that teachers and students can take advantage of.Two new computer carts have been purchased for the ENL department, each with 34 Chromebooks for student use.We have installed a fully equipped computer lab for the standalone and Integrated ELA classes.Every ENL classroom will have a library of translation dictionaries similar to those used by students on State and local exams, as well as academic vocabulary glossaries specific to the content area.Every classroom is equipped with a SMART Board capable of delivering multimedia, interactive presentations. The panels are Internet connected enabling teachers to utilize online translation software, connect to online textbook resources, and a variety of other curricular enhancements.We are instituting a uniform annotation methedology - SCUBA (Scan, Circle, Underline, Box, Analyze) - to aid reading comprehension and a uniform paragraph writing structure - SPA (Statement, Proof, Analysis) - to aid in the organization of written work.We use leveled readers where available in ELA and Social Studies classrooms. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is delivered in the ENL Program in a variety of ways. Students use bilingual dictionaries and glossaries. In the content-area classes students are paired (more proficient with less-proficient). We offer NLA classes in Chinese, Russian and Spanish. Bilingual counselors are available in Russian and Spanish. We have a multicultural faculty and many of our teachers speak the languages of our students. The holdings in the library reflect a wide range of multilingual books, materials and resources. This year we have issued dictionaries to our Russian, Chinese, and Spanish students. We plan to expand the availability of dictionaries to include a class set of various languages in each of the standalone ENL classrooms. In the TBE program, content instruction will be delivered in a combination of H1 and English, and as the year progresses and students' English proficiency develops, the proportion of H1 will diminish to be replaced by English instruction. Students at the Beginning level will receive 60% of their content instruction in HL. Intermediate level students will receive 50% of content instruction in HL. Advanced level students will receive 25% of content instruction in HL. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All materials, texts and resources used for the instruction of ELLs are age-appropriate and infused with academic rigor to ensure that these students have full access to the instructional program and are on a level playing field with their English-proficient peers. Instruction is standards-based and nothing is "watered down." Instruction is differentiated and scaffolded as students are expected to achieve to high standards with the appropriate supports and interventions. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 7  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We offer many activities to assist newly-enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. We hold orientation sessions with multilingual assistance conducted by our bilingual Guidance Counselors. We have established a "buddy system" to assist students in becoming familiarized with the school plant, classes, programs, clubs, laboratory requirements, physical education requirements, school and graduation requirements. We conduct a number of parent workshops throughout the year for our parents of ELLs which are also conducted by our bilingual counselors. Our Parent Coordinator reaches out to the parents of ELLs to keep them informed of ongoing school activities and PTA involvement. This is accomplished by mailings and phone messenger in the preferred languages. Newly enrolled ELLs are urged to attend after-school tutoring to acquire expedite the acquisition of basic language skills needed. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELLs participate in LOTE classes in Chinese, Italian, Spanish, French, and Russian. We offer AP Spanish Language and Literature classes as well as AP Chinese. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? At Madison, the interdisciplinary Professional Development Committee comprised of teachers from every department, guidance counselors, a social worker and an assistant principal uses the school's CEP Goals to prescribe the adult learning for the coming year. This year's team has developed five learning paths for teachers to choose from, each one supporting the needs of ELLs in its own way. The UDL learning path will allow ENL and content teachers to develop units of study and lesson plans that differentiate instruction for the needs of the ELLs in their classes. The team teaching learning path will teach ENL teachers about the various models of team teaching and how to use each model to best achieve learning objectives. The instructional design learning path will teach teachers of ELLs how to use various types of data to identify the needs of their learners and modify instruction based on assessment results. The social/emotional learning path will allow teachers to explore the various stresses that may hinder learning and how to mitigate these factors to maximize learning. Finally, the MOTP learning path with explicate the Danielson rubric and give teachers a chance to revisit lesson plans and modify them to make their teaching practice highly effective. Additionally, ENL teachers will engage in a deep reading of our newly modified and written curricula alongside its creators in order to ensure its widespread use across ENL classrooms. We are starting a new mentoring program in which the mentors of untenured teachers will meet to develop a curriculum for our newest faculty members. There will be new teacher meetings monthly in which we can help new teachers support their ELLs. As our ENL teachers only support students in integrated ELA and a few Social Studies classes, our ENL teachers will begin after-school workshops for content teachers of ELLs. These workshops will develop content teachers' abilities to develop language objectives in addition to their content objectives and develop activities that foster language acquisition to support ELL achievement. 8  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The Professional Development Committee has allotted five one-hour-twenty-minute sessions in the fall term in addition to 2 full-day Chancellor's Days of professional development. During these PD times, teachers will engage in their chosen learning paths. Additionally, Madison procured CTLE approved, online PD through Teq which has a library of prerecorded online workshops in all contents and in language acquisition. The PD Committee also monitors PWeekly, the DOE Professional Learning Opportunities webpage, and the DELLS website, and notifies staff intermittently as new learning opportunities arise. Records are kept by the use of agendas and attendance sheets maintained by the entity conducting the PD. Participants maintain their personal records as well. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ELL students have been designated into cohorts and assigned to our ENL teachers. Parent meetings are scheduled throughout the school year with the attempt to schedule as many of them as possible within close proximity to the end of a marking period. These meetings are also facilitated with the assistance of our Guidance Counselors assigned to our ELLs. Through articulation, ENL and content teachers discuss their cohort students in order to have current information for the parent/guardian. Translation services are provided as needed either with in-house resources or through the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit. Records are maintained by the individual teachers as well as the ELL coordinator. Parents are notified by mail in their preferred language and by phone call with continued follow up for parents that do not respond. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents/guardians are invited to attend monthly PTA meetings where we have translation services available. Parents are notified in their preferred language. In addition, a series of workshops are scheduled throughout the school year for the parents/guardians of ELLs which include but are not limited to training in the use of SKEDULA/Pupil Path and Naviance. Parents have also been given a copy of Achieve NYC for the current school year in the various languages. All parents are notified in their preferred language of all activities taking place in the school throughout the year. In addition, the school added direct phone lines to the offices of the ENL Coordinator, the International House Coordinator and House Liason, as well as the AP. We also make extensive use of the Over-The-Phone Interpreter Services. Next year, we will endeavor to partner with parents in monthly cultural celebrations. A parent committee will organize a schedule of celebrations and organizers will mobilize other community members to participate in national celebrations of culture. In addition, the AP/ENL Compliance and the AP/ENL Instruction are members and actively participate in the Brooklyn South Borough Support Office's Language Advisory Board which meets five times a year in collaboration with other schools in Brooklyn South, to develop and implement programs and initiatives to improve and increase language access to our ENL parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 9  0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jodie Cohen, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: James Madison High School School DBN: 22K425 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jodie Cohen Title Principal Juan Subirana Assistant Principal Rita Troiso Parent Coordinator Dawn Schwaber ENL/Bilingual Teacher Irene Rodriguez Parent Avi Dachs Frank Costa Roseann Torre Madeline DiLorenzo Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Nataliya Chernikova School Counselor Michael Prayor Aaron Perez Olivia Duran Dawn Schwaber Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Brooklyn South Other AP/ISS Other ENL Coordinator Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/25/18 06/25/18 06/25/18 06/25/18 06/25/18 06/25/18 06/25/18 06/25/18 06/25/18 06/25/18 06/25/18 06/25/18 06/29/17 2  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 22K425 School Name: James Madison High School Superintendent: Michael Prayer The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Juan Dawn Avi Subirana Schwaber Dachs AP/ENL Compliance ELL Coordinator AP/ENL Yes NO Yes Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parent are interviewed in order to complete the HLIS. Based on their responses to part 3 of the HLIS, the determination is made as to how information will be distributed to LEP parents. Using the LEP report on ATS, the school identifies all of the languages that are spoken by our students. Additional methods include information from the Emergency Contact Card (Blue Card), parent surveys and teacher surveys collected by class. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 3  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Armenian Arabic Azerbaijani Belorussian Bengali Bushman Burmese Cebuana Chinese Any Cantonese Croatian French Fulani Georgian Haitian Creole Hebrew Italian Korean Macedonian Mandarin Nahuatl English 16 2 28 1 0 17 1 3 1 264 0 2 5 1 17 30 6 0 3 0 0 1 1968 Student Does Not Speak 1 Pilipino (Tagalog) Punjabi Polish Quiche Romanian Russian Senufo Slovak Spanish American Sign Languange Thai Tibetan Turkmen 1 3 4 1 1 436 4 2 307 1 1 1 1 .48 .06 .85 .03 0 .51 .03 .09 .03 7.99 0 .06 .15 .03 .51 .91 .18 0 .09 0 0 .03 59.58 .03 .03 .09 .12 .03 .03 13.2 .12 .06 9.29 .03 .03 .03 .03 21 3 31 1 1 19 1 2 1 211 58 2 5 1 18 30 5 1 3 1 8 1 .64 .09 .94 .03 .03 .58 .03 .06 .03 6.39 1.76 .06 .15 .03 .54 .91 .15 .03 .09 .03 .24 .03 1925 58.28 1 1 3 4 0 1 441 5 2 307 1 1 1 1 .03 .03 .09 .12 0 .03 13.35 .15 .06 9.29 .03 .03 .03 .03 4  Turkish Tadzhik (Tajik) Urdu Ukrainian Uzbek Vietnamese 10 4 100 18 37 4 .3 .12 3.03 .54 1.12 .12 9 4 111 18 38 5 .27 .12 3.36 .54 1.15 .15 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent letters, communications, bulletins, Sept. 2018 and ongoing as needed Pupil Path instructions Documents describing school's programs, graduation requirements, Regents requirements, AIS programs, tutoring sessions, etc. Sept. 2018 and ongoing as needed Letters disseminated from the Central Office with modifications for James Madison's programs. Sept. 2018 and ongoing as needed Phone outreach to parents advising them of important events, meeting, testing dates, tutoring sessions, AIS programs, etc. Sept. 2018 and ongoing as needed Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. In house translators, DOE document translation service, Outside vendor (The Big Word) for low inference languages In house translators, DOE document translation service, Outside vendor (The Big Word) for low inference languages In house translators, DOE document translation service, Outside vendor (The Big Word) for low inference languages Translated phone blasts in the preferred languages and use of Over-the-Phone Interpreter Services. 5  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? ELL Parent Orientation September 27, 2018 August 29 - September 1, 2018 Parent-teacher Conferences and ongoing as needed. November, 2018 March, 2019 Pupil Path/SKEDULA Oct, 2018 NAVIANCE Training Nov, 2018 NYSESLAT Prep Mar, 2019 Regents Prep May, 2019 In-house translators and Over-the-Phone Interpreter Services when necessary. In-house translators and Over-the-Phone Interpreter Services when necessary. In-house translators and Over-the-Phone Interpreter Services when necessary. In-house translators and Over-the-Phone Interpreter Services when necessary. In-house translators and Over-the-Phone Interpreter Services when necessary. In-house translators and Over-the-Phone Interpreter Services when necessary. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The school has the ability to send out phone messages in the preferred languages as well as the use of email and Pupil Path. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The school staff is made aware of the requirements of the regulation during the initial faculty conference in September. Additionally, the ELL coordinator meets with New Teachers to the school every other month in New Teacher PD sessions. Information on translation requirements and services available to parents is communicated on an ongoing basis to the staff including School Safety by the ELL coordinator and the AP/ENL Compliance. 6  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school will fulfill Section VII of the Chancellor’s Regulations A-663 regarding parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services in the following ways: •Parents are provided written notification of their rights regarding these services during the orientation process and is given instructions on how to obtain such services. •There are signs posted at the main entrance in the covered languages indicating the offices where notification can be obtained. •The school safety plan will be modified to reflect procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language assistance services will receive such services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school gathers feedback through Parent Surveys and parent meetings. The school has been sensitive to ELL parent concerns when we have been made aware of any and take the necessary steps to correct any issues that may arise. 7 
