 21K468 School Name: KINGSBOROUGH EARLY COLLEGE SCHOOL Principal: TRACEE MURREN   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Kingsborough Early College Secondary School 332100011468 Grades 6 - 12 School Number (DBN): 21K468 2630 Benson Avenue Brooklyn New York 11214 718-333-7850 Phone Number: 718-333-7875 Fax: Karen Hoffman KHoffman3@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Tracee Murren Michael Kullman Anna Lembersky Sarah Gotimer GerrylynnHaak Aliena Abramson Sayla Haak n/a Affinity Schools CUNY/UA Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Fred Walsh Superintendent: 333 7th Avenue Room 709 New York New York 10001 FWalsh@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212 356 3739 Phone Number: 212 356 7514 Fax:   Affinity FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street Brooklyn NY 11201 AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 935 5618 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) TraceeMurren Michael Kullman Anna Lembersky GerrylynnHaak Aliena Abramson Sayla Haak Gennady Lembersky Robin Saffioti Coretta Beckham Marielle Abramson *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) SarahGotimer Alisa Patti Albert Watkins Johanna Aragon Dennis Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement Section 4: CEP Overview The Mission of Kingsborough Early College Secondary School (KECSS) is to bridge the traditional gaps that can exist between middle school, high school, and college, thereby making both high school and college more accessible, attainable, and affordable to our students. Through our shared commitment to educate the whole child, we prepare students to be academically, socially, and emotionally prepared for enrollment in senior colleges, and opportunities in   the work force, and to be critical thinkers, independent learners, and effective communicators who effectively advocate for themselves and others. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The College Experience As an Early College school, KECSS is part of CUNY's Early College Initiative (ECI). As part of our program, students begin their exposure to college-level expectations as part of their 6th grade mandated parent/student orientation, which takes place on the Kingsborough Community College campus. This partnership continues throughout students' middle school experience, as professors volunteer to facilitate enrichment clusters at KECSS on Friday afternoons, and as our 8th grade students participate in a College Immersion Program as part of their advisory program, which involves sampling college courses on the campus. Also, in the beginning of the ninth grade, students begin to take college courses! Their first college course takes place over the summer in between 8 th and 9 th grade, and is held on the Kingsborough Community College campus. For the duration of their time at KECSS students continue to be enrolled in college courses. If they pass all the required courses, they are eligible for graduation with an Associate of Arts Degree conferred by Kingsborough Community College (KCC). In addition to partnering with ECI through CUNY, KECSS also has a strong partnership with the Middle School Quality Initiative. Throughout the year, a literacy coach from MSQI comes to our school to meet with administration and selected teachers to plan and implement a targeted strategic reading program. This coach supports the work by engaging teachers in cycles of literacy coaching, which involve co-planning, classroom visits, and post-observation reflection. Our middle school teachers also attend MSQI professional learning sessions throughout the year, and have participated in pilot programs, such as Reading Apprenticeship Across Disciplines, Word Generation, and Just Words, all of which focus on teaching our students strong literacy practices and academic vocabulary. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Populations As we are an un-screened Early College school, we have a diverse student population. On every grade level, we have both Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) and Special Education Teaching Support Services (SETTS) classes, as well as students with Related Services (RS) such as speech, physical therapy, and occupational therapy. The needs of these students vary, but include literacy and numeracy supports, behavioral interventions, and social/emotional skill development. Outside of our special education classes, we have many incoming 6th grade students who evidence significant reading deficiencies as determined by their fifth grade NYS ELA exam scores, as well as their performance on assessments used by our middle school English Language Arts instructors (I.e. the Degrees of Reading Power assessment (DRP), Running Records, Word Identification and Spelling Test (WIST) and the Test of Silent Word Reading Fluency assessment). These students need a significant amount of direct reading instruction in the areas of decoding, fluency, and the use of active comprehension strategies. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Framework for Great Schools This year KECSS made particular strides in the area of Collaborative Teachers as indicated by our well-developed QR rating. As our teaching staff is exceptionally diverse, the implementation of an Inquiry Group model of whole staff professional development allowed us to offer differentiated, targeted, meaningful professional development to our entire teaching staff. Working together in self-selected areas of interest or growth, our teachers explored multiple topics related to both the Danielson Framework and the needs of our student population in teacher-facilitated learning communities. 0  Rigorous instruction (5A) Our school has done a lot of work around aligning curricula to the CCLS, including using item analyses of summative assessments and ongoing standards-aligned teacher assessments to determine gaps in instruction and addressing students' areas of need. This work has resulted in 76% (68 our of 89 students) of the high school graduates in 2018 earning a full Associates degree from Kingsborough Community College. Area of Focus: In order to provide more rigorous and challenging instructional tasks in our classes, we have selected questioning and discussions strategies as the focus of the 2018-2019 inquiry group cycles to support teachers in developing more rigorous and challenging tasks for students, and to elevate the level of discourse among students. We selected 3a as a component to focus our inquiry work around because teacher Advance ratings suggest that this is the area of greatest need for our staff with 48% of teachers rated effective during the 2017-2018 school year. Collaborative Teachers (5B) This past year, teachers engaged in successful cycles of professional inquiry and were able to identify key instructional high-leverage strategies to be shared with the entire school staff. This led to the professional growth of our pedagogical staff in Danielson 3a from 48% effective to 54% effective. Area of Focus: In order to leverage the professional capacity of teachers and use the staff as a pedagogical resource, structured inter-visitations will be conducted during each inquiry cycle so that teachers observe the implementation of questioning and discussion strategies and provide each other with constructive feedback on improving their use of the strategy. This area of focus is reflected by the desire of teachers for additional feedback from peers as reflected by 90% of teachers noting that they have enough time to collaborate with teachers on their staff survey. Additional time to inter-visit each other in the classroom to view inquiry strategies and to provide non-evaluative feedback to each other will help teachers leverage their professional knowledge to support each others' growth. Supportive Environment (5C) KECSS has a strong advisory program with a specially designed curriculum that creates a school environment where students are able to foster strong teacher-student relationships and a sense of belonging. Our advisory period is a time to ensure that students receive social, emotional, behavioral, and academic supports necessary to be well-rounded individuals who are able to balance the demands of our rigorous academic program. We attribute our high graduation rate (100% for this past year) in part to the support students have through middle school and high school in their advisory and the relationships they build with teachers who act as academic and social-emotional advocates within the school. Area of Focus: Through conversations with previous 9th and 10th grade students, we have determined to create personalized learning opportunities within 9th and 10th grade advisories aligned to college and career readiness. For this upcoming year, the 9th grade advisory has been revamped to provide opportunities for students to complete a deep dive focused on potential careers that interest them and then to explore the financial, social, and familial impact of their chosen field. In 10th grade, students will conduct exploratory work around college choice and preparation culminating in a preliminary college list that will support their decision-making through 11th and 12th grade college application process. Trust (5d) KECSS has worked hard to establish trust between teachers and students and teachers and school leadership. Our success is exemplified by the pedagogical risks that teachers take in the classroom by implementing novel strategies and approaches as a part of our inquiry work. This trust is exemplified by the high level (100%) of teachers who reported that they trusted school leadership decision-making. Area of Focus: As a continued area of focus, this year we will work to build trust between the school and families by increasing parent engagement in their children's' academic work. The need to work on these relationships is reflected by 74% of parents saying on the parent survey that they have enough opportunities to engage in their children's' 1  academic work. We believe that creating additional opportunities for parents to visit the school through monthly learning walks will help increase opportunities to engage in student learning and also increase the amount of trust parents place in their children's' teachers and school leadership. Strong Family/Community Ties (5E) Our school has used JupiterGrades and traditional parent-teacher conferences to ensure that families have constant access to information regarding their student's progress in their classes. This strength is reflected by the parent survey that shows that 95% of parents feel that they can easily communicate with their children's teachers. Key Area of Focus: Our areas of focus are situated around the need to increase parent involvement in the school so that they are familiar with important school routines that support their students education. The need for this is reflected in the 2017-2018 parent survey that shows that 74% of parents felt that they had enough opportunities to engage in their children's learning. To increase family engagement, the following activities will take place:  As a result of the need to effectively support students’ education and improve teacher practices of monitoring student progress and providing re-teaching opportunities, a full day professional development program will be provided to teachers at the beginning of the year to help norm around the process of benchmarking, re-teaching, and providing action plans for students so that students can demonstrate mastery of class content before their end of the year assessments (effective school leadership). In order to provide greater understanding for parents of their children’s education and to provide more opportunities for parents to be involved in their children’s educations, we will introduce monthly learning-walks to parents beginning in October of 2018 with the 6thgrade and providing monthly opportunities for each grade (effective school leadership).   To promote parent understanding of how to support their students’ academic success from home, parent-teacher team workshops will be held at the conclusion of each monthly PTA and SLT meeting in order for teachers to model activities to parents that can be conducted at home to extend educational opportunities beyond the classroom (strong family-community ties). 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 21K468 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 657 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 9 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 24 37 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 71.0% % Attendance Rate 65.4% % Reduced Lunch 1.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 29.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 37.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.23 5% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 54.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 95% 87% 95.0% 27.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A YES N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A YES N/A YES No N/A 74 74 9 91.8% 5.2% 18.7% 24.0% 7.5% 2.1% 4 24% 6.1 27.6% 90% 95% 92% 94.9% 56% N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Through engaging curricula, rigorous instruction and active engagement, students of KECSS have experienced academic success. At the end of the 2017-2018 school year, 100% percent of students graduated from high school with a Regents diploma and 85% of graduating seniors also earned their Associates Degree from Kingsborough Community College. We attribute this to our CCLS standard-based instruction, literacy based lessons, student-centered activities, and professional development for teachers around the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Professional development has raised the level of instruction for our students and increased the capacity of our teachers. However, data from the School Performance Dashboard shows that our students' proficiency rate in mathematics was 29%, which is below the district and city levels. In addition, our math department's average MOTP score in 3b (Questioning and Discussion) was 2.4 and 2.88 in 3d (Using Formative Assessment in Instruction), which both fall below the Effective rating. The focus of this goal is to strengthen the curriculum-planning and instructional practices of the teachers in our mathematics department, including a focus on the implementation of specific formative assessment and questioning and discussion techniques. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will effectively deepen the level of rigor across mathematics classrooms as evidenced by a 7% increase from 28% to 35% in the number of students scoring at the proficient level on the New York State assessments as a result of 100% of teachers taking part in rounds of inquiry work concentrating on formative assessment and questioning and discussion instructional strategies, and curricular progress-monitoring strategies. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Our CUNY Instructional Coach will engage in coaching cycles with selected mathematics instructors, which will include classroom visits and post-visit planning sessions. These visits will target individual teachers' areas of need. Our CUNY Instructional Coach will facilitate professional learning sessions for our mathematics teachers to review targeted instructional strategies and curriculum planning practices. The selected strategies will be informed by the coach's identified areas of needs based on classroom visits. Mathematics teachers, Students 09/2018– 06/2019 CUNY Instructional Coach, Principal, Assistant Principal Mathematics teachers, Students 09/2018– 06/2019 CUNY Instructional Coach, Principal, Assistant Principal The principal and assistant principal will provide direct support for identified teachers through activities such as co-teaching, data analysis protocols, live-coaching, and curriculum planning. Mathematics teachers, Students 09/2018– 06/2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Mathematics teachers will engage in targeted Personal Professional Conversations with administration three times a year. During these conversations, teachers will set individualized goals informed by their data from standards-aligned assessments, and will create instructional plans to address gaps in student achievement. Mathematics teachers, Students October 2018, February 2019, June 2019 Administration The mathematics department will meet bi-weekly to engage in shared planning activities, such as engaging in protocols for looking at student work, data analysis protocols, creating common formative assessments. and planning lessons to incorporate questioning and discussion and formative assessment strategies, Mathematics teachers, Students September 2018 January 2018 March 2019 May 2019 09/2018– 06/2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Mathematics Department Chair Principal, Assistant Principal, Mathematics Department Chair Mathematics teachers will engage in inter-visitations, during which they will collect low-inference notes on department-selected formative assessment and questioning and discussion strategies. Teachers will share feedback and make revisions to strategy implementation plans during their department meeting time. Mathematics teachers, Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 5  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  During SLCs, students will reflect on their performance in their mathematics classes, focusing on their strengths and weaknesses. They will share this with their family members during the conference in an effort to leverage family supports and content strength into success in the classroom. Jupitergrades will be used to keep parents up to date on student performance, academic goals, and participation in all class activities, including discussion.   Parents will have regular, reciprocal communication with teachers during their weekly contractually-obligated parent outreach time when teachers will send home communications to parents regarding student progress in class and open up a dialogue with parents about ways to support students at home.  Beginning of the year curriculum night will inform parents of this year’s concentration on class discussions and demonstrate to parents different examples of activities students will take part in during class so that they understand the expectations behind class participation grades. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  UFT Teacher Center coach to help structure inquiry groups.  100 hours per session for summer planning of inquiry cycles and for after school check ins with school leadership.  50 hours per session for instructional leads and inquiry group facilitators to meet together to discuss success and challenges of inquiry groups and department teams  General resources for inquiry groups and department teams: poster paper, markers, etc.  Teachers will be placed into inquiry groups that are cross-curricular and composed of mixed-grade teachers to leverage the pedagogical perspectives of diverse teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, 85% of mathematics teachers will have implemented a formative assessment strategy and a system for benchmarking and student goal-setting, resulting in a 4% increase in the number of students demonstrating proficiency in midterm assessment aligned to NYS standards. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Student perception survey using Google Forms.   Teacher debrief survey at the conclusion of each inquiry cycle to assess the meaningfulness of their inquiry work.  Beginning and middle of the year professional conversations with teachers to assess successes, challenges, and discuss student academic growth. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? As our staff continues to grow, certain foundational rituals and routines are being revisited. One particular area of focus for teachers is the process of benchmarking, re-teaching, and action planning, as it is central to preparing our students for state assessments and success in their college courses. A need for additional supports with this routine is demonstrated by the 2017-2018 student survey where 68% of students say that "teachers give them specific suggestions about how they can improve their work.” This trend is also reflected in beginning, middle, and end of the year professional conversations with school staff that demonstrates varying levels of implementation of benchmarking and action planning leading to inconsistencies in opportunities for some students to address knowledge deficits throughout the year. Establishing a beginning of the year professional development program around this benchmarking routine will help address the need for students to have access to opportunities to improve their work before they sit for end of the year assessments. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will have successfully implemented the school-wide benchmarking, re-teaching, and action planning routine during each unit of study in order to prepare students for their end of the year assessments. This will be evidenced by school leadership observations and by a 5% increase in student pass rate in core subjects by 93% to 98%. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Summer orientation for new hires to introduce them to key staff and to familiarize them with school rituals and routines. At the summer orientation, teachers will spend three days working together, reviewing initiatives, and learning specific KECSS rituals and routines. During this orientation, they will also have time to plan and practice the implementation of these programs. New Teachers, PCTs, a small group of teachers. July 2018 Assistant Principal, PCTs, UFT Coach All teachers September 2018 Assistant Principal, PCTs, UFT Coach Selected teachers 09/2018-06/2019 UFT Teacher Center Coach, PCTs, Assistant Principal All teachers 09/2018-06/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals Beginning of the year professional development to norm full staff around the use of benchmarks, the rationale and purpose of re-teaching, and the process of providing action plans for students to demonstrate mastery. UFT Teacher Center coach and PCTs will provide individualized instruction to teachers who struggle with benchmarking process based upon informal observations. Instructional coaches will model processes and accompany teachers on visitations to observe teachers who effectively implement these rountines. Beginning, middle, and end of the year professional conversations that ask teachers to reflect on student progress as demonstrated through benchmarks and to monitor target 12 students who may potential not pass their core classes. Each conversation will ask teachers to look at student data and track progress throughout the year, focusing on the effect of re-teaching on student progress. School leaders will discuss strategies to support struggling learners in order to provide interventions for students who may potentially not pass their core subjects. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight.   System of benchmarks and action plans will be reviewed at curriculum night to introduce process to parents and familiarize them with what their children should do if they do not demonstrate mastery on an assessment. Learning walks throughout the year to offer families an opportunity to interact with teachers and to see how classes are structured. Families will also become familiar with language used during the process of benchmarking and action planning. 9    Families will have access to JupiterGrades to offer insight into their student's performance throughout the year. Families will have opportunities to communicate with the school regarding academic progress and daily attendance. Teachers will communicate weekly with parents during parent outreach time to offer updates on student progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  100 hours per session for summer orientation of new hires.  UFT Teacher Center Coach and PCTs to provide individualized instruction to teachers.  Teachers will be provided with coverages during teaching periods in order to visit the classes of their colleagues in order to observe benchmarking best practices.  50 hours per session for teacher leaders to provide after school support for individual teachers who need additional work with preparing power standards and aligning them to assessments and benchmarks. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of teachers will have implemented the school model of benchmarking, re-teaching, and action planning into their classrooms at least twice in order to support the mastery of their students leading to a 2% increase in students passing their core classes from 93% to 95%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student perception surveys using Google Forms.   Teacher leader monitoring of teacher performance trends.  Beginning, middle, end of the year conversations between teachers and school leadership to track student mastery and progress towards successfully passing core classes. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2017-2018 school year, 48% of teachers were rated as effective in component 3b of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. As a component of Rigorous Instruction in the Great Schools Framework, we have chosen questioning and discussion strategies as the focus of our 2018-2019 inquiry group cycles. In order to leverage the pedagogical capacity of our staff, we will create structured visitation opportunities for all teachers and integrate it as a component for our inquiry cycles. Inquiry group facilitators will accommodate small groups of teachers to classroom visits on days that teachers are implementing their questioning and discussion strategy so that teachers have the opportunity to observe how a different teacher uses the strategy and then provides non-evaluative, constructive feedback to teachers. From this feedback teachers will modify their implementation of the strategy and choose a specific next discussion step to work on. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will have participated in a structured visitation as a visitor and 50% of teachers will have opened their classrooms up to be visited, resulting in a 10% rise in teachers rated as highly effective in questioning and discussion on Advance from a 48% to a 58%. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Beginning of the year professional development day to norm around the use of constructive, low-inference feedback and how to avoid evaluative or high-inference words and phrases. Teachers will practice taking low-inference notes based upon a video of a teacher implementing a questioning and discussion strategy and then debrief sharing out the feedback and make note of low-inference versus high-inference feedback and the impact of each. A Google form survey will sort teachers by preference to pair, small-group, and whole class discussion techniques to provide individualized professional development opportunities to teachers based on self-perceived areas of improvement. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers September 2018 Assistant Principal, PCTS, UFT Teacher Center Coach, Inquiry group facilitators All teachers September 2018 UFT Teacher Center Coach Teacher leaders (PCTs and two teachers) will serve as facilitators and lead weekly inquiry group meetings to discuss challenges, successes, and possible modifications to discussion strategies. PCTs, Teacher leaders PCTs, Inquiry group facilitators Weekly meetings 09/2018-06/2019 Visitations will be scheduled for teachers in each inquiry group to open their classroom to teachers in their specific group and these small groups will be joined by the facilitator for a 15 minute visitation during which time the visitors will take low-inference notes, aligned to the critical components of Danielson 3b, on the teachers implementation of the discussion strategy. Inquiry groups will debrief the visitations in small groups and co-plan next steps for the visited teacher to improve their implementation of the discussions strategy. All teachers Bi-weekly visitations 09/2018-06/2019 Assistant principal, PCTS, Inquiry group facilitators All teachers Bi-weekly debriefs 09/2018-06/2019 PCTS, Inquiry group facilitators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  At the beginning of the year curriculum night, families will learn about how teachers are working together to learn from each other by visiting each other’s classrooms and we will link this practice to our new learning-walk initiative that parents will have the opportunity to sign up for starting in October 2018. 2   Jupitergrades will demonstrate to parents the school’s emphasis on class discussions by posting student participation assignments that track the contribution of students to their discussions and indicate to parents opportunities for students to grow in class participation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  UFT Teacher Center Coach and PCTs to help facilitate inquiry groups and plan professional development around the use of low-inference notes during visitations.  Material for inquiry groups and end of cycle share fairs (poster board, markers, etc.)  100 hours per session for summer planning of beginning of the year professional development day and for after school work throughout the year on refining the inquiry cycles. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of teachers will have participated in a structured visit of a group member's classroom while accompanied by an inquiry group facilitator and 25% of teachers will have opened their classrooms up to visitors to model a discussion strategy resulting in a 5% rise in teachers rated highly effective on Advance as compared to end of 2018 scores. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Advance measurements of teacher performance.  Teacher reflections at the conclusion of each inquiry cycle to help measure perception of the value of the  strategies and make refinements for the next cycle. Student perception surveys to measure the impact of new discussion strategies on engagement and meaningfulness of class work. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Through engaging curricula, rigorous instruction and active engagement, students of KECSS have experienced academic success. At the end of the 2017-2018 school year, 100% percent of students graduated from high school with a Regents diploma and 85% of graduating seniors also earned their Associates Degree from Kingsborough Community College. We attribute this to our CCLS standard-based instruction, literacy based lessons, student-centered activities, and professional development for teachers around the Danielson Framework for Teaching. It is the mission of KECSS to bridge the gap between middle school, high school, and college and for students to earn their High School Diploma and Associates Degree simultaneously. In order to meet this goal, students are registered for college level courses that fulfil both New York State (NYS) high school graduation requirements and City University of New York (CUNY) Associates Degree Requirements. In September 2018, 80% of students in the middle school were reading below grade level as evidenced on the students' DRP assessment. This is especially problematic, as our students are expected to take and pass their first college level course the summer after they graduate from 8th grade. It is our goal to ensure that regardless of their academic backgrounds, middle school students enrolled in this course are exposed to and can access intellectually challenging academic content, rigorous college level texts, and course materials. In the 2017-2018 school year, on average, 30% students in our lowest third did not earn their Associates Degree, largely due to their inability to meet college readiness score requirements for access to higher level courses. In addition, our students’ mean SAT score was 1120, which has impeded their access to higher level tertiary programs and put them at a disadvantage in pursuing post-secondary opportunities. The focus of this goal is to ensure that we provide our students with equitable access to viable curriculum, skills development, and the services and resources they need to gain acceptance into continuing educational programs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase the college readiness index by 5% from 81% to 86% by providing our students with equitable access opportunities through our school’s participation in middle school and high school College Access For All. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Student performance in college classes is monitored by the college liaison. Students who are not maintaining a class average of C or higher will meet with a college advisor to create an academic contract. As part of the academic contract, the students, advisor, and professor create SMART goals and action plans for improvement in the course. These action plans include participation in tutoring sessions, assignment review, and extra credit activities. All students Meeting dates to review student contracts: October 2018 & April 2019 College liaison and Assistant Principal Our school’s “Target 12” initiative will be used to provide individualized support for struggling students in the lowest third of our school’s student population, including ELLs and SWDs. Students meet with teachers monthly to review their progress in their courses and implement the action plans outlined in their academic contracts. Our data specialist, UFT Teacher Center Coach, and Peer Collaborative Teachers will analyze all of our previous year's data to provide teachers with academic performance trends for their courses. They will facilitate professional development sessions with staff to identify specific strategies to target areas of need revealed by this data. Afterwards, all high school course curriculum maps will be designed to include ongoing formative assessments aligned to standards-based benchmarks to assess student progress throughout instructional units. Strategies for multiple entry points and scaffolds will be designed by teams of teachers to support struggling students, including ELLs and SWDs, in mastering these assessments and benchmarks. The College Access For All Team will meet with their designated coach three times a year to analyze trends in student achievement and college readiness indicators, and will create an action plan to develop college access opportunities and supports for our students. Lowest Third 09/2018-06/2019 Target 12 Team Lowest Third September 2018 January 2018 May 2019 Data specialist, UFT Teacher Center Coach, Teachers, Peer Collaborative Teachers Middle and High School Students 09/2018-06/2019 College Access For All Coach, Administration, College Access For All Teacher Team Members Our school will partner with a CBO to offer a subsidized SAT tutoring program to 11th and 12th grade students and our college advisor will meet with students to ensure they sign up for multiple SAT test sessions. 11th and 12th grade students 01/2019 Administration, CBO 5 8th grade students will participate in a College Immersion program at Kingsborough Community College, during which they will tour the campus and sit for sample college courses and meet with professors to familiarize them with college expectations. 8th Grade students June 2019 8th grade Advisors, Assistant Principal, CUNY College Liaison 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Staff will analyze data about families' feedback on the School Environment Survey to identify areas of improvement in communicating with families about their child's learning and progress.  The KECSS Parent Coordinator and CUNY College Liaison will host FAFSA meetings designed to support  families in applying for financial aid for post-secondary programs. Families will be invited to student-led conferences to meet with their child and their advisor to discuss their child's personalized learning goals.   The families of at-risk students will be invited to meet with teachers and advisors to review and create plans for improving their child's progress. These meetings will supplement our regularly scheduled parent-teacher conferences and SLCs. Families will be invited to engage in Learning Walks, during which they will visit classrooms and provide feedback about instruction, which will be reviewed and analyzed by staff and administration. Families will be invited to attend mandated informational sessions to preview college and instructional expectations for each upcoming year. Staff will pilot modules from the College Access for All Family-U curriculum on specified parent-teacher conference nights to help families learn about accessing college opportunities for their child. Families will have access to students' grades through our online grading program, JupiterGrades, and will receive progress reports that are in addition to our regularly scheduled report cards four times a year.    Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  UFT Teacher Center Coach and PCTs to provide support and assistance for teachers.  College professors to teach in our college immersion classes  CBO for SAT tutoring  CBO to run college trips for middle and high school students  MSQI funding for reading enrichment programs  Per session for after school and Saturday regents tutoring Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 6  By February 2019, 65% of students will be on track to meet the college readiness score requirements as evidenced by data gathered from the November 2018 SAT administration, January regents data and mid-term assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student perception survey data Learning Walk feedback from families Standards-aligned midterm score data     November SAT score data  Course pass rate data January Regents data   Course withdrawal rates Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As an ECI school with a scope and sequence distinctly different from traditional high school models, it is imperative to increase the involvement of families in their children’s education in order to increase their awareness of the intricacies of their children’s corse load as well as opportunities to help support them at home. The fact that 92% of respondents to the 2017-2018 parent survey agreed that “the principal at their school promotes family and community involvement in the school” highlights the need to engage in this work of increasing parent involvement. In addition, last year, 50% of parents attended parent teacher conferences. However, when attendance was scheduled by staff members for Student Led Conferences, 85% of parents attended. This increase in parent engagement suggests that creating additional structured opportunities for parents to visit the school and engage in their children’s education could promote increased parent involvement at our school. To address this need, we will implement monthly learning-walks starting in November with the 6th grade and continue each month with different grades so that parents have increased opportunities to visit the school and involve themselves with their children’s education. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 30% of parents will have participated in a school learning-walk, increasing parent involvement as reflected by a 3% rise to the survey item, “families say that the principal at their school promotes family and community involvement in the school” from 92% to 95%. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The concept, rationale, and procedures of learning walks will be introduced to teachers at the beginning of the year during a half-day professional development program. The overview of the program will be presented, a team of volunteers to lead the program will be assembled, and a tentative time line for future work will be outlined. Families will learn about the learning-walk opportunities on curriculum night. They will be presented with an overview, rationale, and description of what the program entails and how it will help their children’s education. Families that are unable will receive flyers for a second open house to specifically review the program via school messenger and backpacked home flyers. Flyers will also be sent home in Spanish to support our ELL population and parents who are not native English speakers. Once a month, families will be invited into our school depending on their children’s grade to take part in a learning walk accompanied by school leadership and grade band teacher leaders. They will visit several classrooms over the course of an hours long visitation to observe highlights and school initiatives and then take part in a debrief and light refreshments to discuss what they observed while on the walk, the way these programs impact student achievement, and to field any questions that arose. Several hour-long learning-walks will take place over the course of the day to provide different opportunities for working families. Parents with SWDs will have the opportunity to visit ICT classes to view how their children's educational needs are being met and learn how to support their students with scaffolds and supports at home. Grade-band teacher leaders will work with teachers to construct model lessons that will highlight school initiatives and to create handouts to families that will explain what they are seeing in the classrooms. Families will also receive a list of debrief questions per class to generate discussions at home about what they saw their children doing while in class as well as suggested activities to complete at home to extend the educational value of what students do within the classroom. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers September 2018 Principal, Assistant Principal, UFT Teacher Center Coach All parents September 2018 Principal, Assistant Principal All Parents Monthly 10/2018-05/2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Grade - Band Teacher Leaders All teachers Monthly 10/2018-05/2019 UFT Teacher Center Coach, PCTS, Grade band teacher leaders 9  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. School messenger and Jupiter grades to keep parents aware of dates for learning-walks.   Beginning of the year curriculum night to review learning-walks rationale and structure.  Parents will be invited to attend the learning-walk event for their children based upon their grade level. For example, 6thgrade parents will be invited in October, 7thgrade parents in November, and onward until the end of the year.  Parents who attend learning-walks will be asked to join the SLT and PTA as a next step for generating increased family engagement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School messenger and Jupiter grades to contact parents.   200 hours per session to provide compensation to grade band teachers who come to summer work and after school work throughout the year to plan learning-walk material.  Refreshments for parents on days of learning walks.  Parent coordinator to help schedule times for parents to come into school to participate in learning walks.  Instructional resources (folders, binders, etc.) to provide to parents containing material to take home to support students at home. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, 15% of parents will have attended at least one learning-walk and perception on opportunities for parent involvement will have increased by 2% as reflected by the exit surveys and a mid-year parent survey sent home via Google Classroom, rising from the previous year’s 92% response to opportunities for parental involvement in school to 94%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Google Forms for parent perception surveys.  Exit surveys for parents to fill out at the conclusion of learning-walks.  Attendance logs for parents on days of learning-walks.  Teacher and student perception surveys evaluating the perceived benefits and challenges of learning-walks Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Middle School- Students were assessed using the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP), and assigned a reading level based on their performance on this test. The Word Identification and Spelling Test (WIST) secondary diagnostic was administered to the lowest performing students in grades 6-8 to further determine their specific areas of deficiency and the type of program needed to best service this population. High School-Students were assessed using the PearsonReading Level Indicatorand assigneda reading level based on their performance on this test. Students who were reading at a level significantly below their assigned Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Achieve 3000 Small group targeted instruction During the day Running Records Saturday School Whole group instruction Literature circles Word Generation Teacher guided online reading platforms Just Words Tutoring Guided Reading Reading Enrichment Socratic Seminar Independent reading and targeted conferences 1  grade level were scheduled for an additional period of literacy instruction. Mathematics Science Students in the middle and high school were assessed using a baseline assessment that corresponds to the state assessment of the course(s) in which they are currently enrolled. Students in the middle and high school were assessed using a baseline assessment that corresponds to the state/city test of the course(s) in which they are currently enrolled. Saturday School Lunch tutoring Through our participation in the Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) we will be implementing more programs to address the needs of our students. Saturday Academy iLearn Small group targeted instruction During the day After School Whole group instruction Math XL Saturday School Lunch tutoring Lunch tutoring Small group targeted instruction During the day CUNY STEM Program After School Whole group instruction Code.org Saturday School Tutoring Tutoring Social Studies SLNOVA Lunch tutoring Students in the middle and high school were assessed using a baseline Small group targeted instruction During the day 2 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) assessment that corresponds to the state/city test of the course(s) in which they are currently enrolled. During grade team meetings teachers recommend students for psychologist evaluations based on class performance and social interactions. Parents are also allowed to request evaluations if they believetheir child is inneed of services. Achieve 3000 After School Whole group instruction Saturday School During the day Tutoring One-to-one Occupational Therapy Small group Physical Therapy Speech Counseling 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2 students 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population.  One-on-one or group counseling sessions with guidance counselor  Continuous outreach by the Parent Coordinator and advisor  Access to school supplies and programs funded by the school Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  The majority of our teachers are highly qualified as defined by the ESEA. Our interview and recruitment process is facilitated by a team of highly qualified teachers, administrators, and parents who assess candidates every year through the use of an established rubric aligned with the Danielson Framework and Best Teacher Practices and KECSS core values.  To retain and support highly qualified teachers, we offer extensive professional development regarding citywide instructional expectations, the implementation of the CCSS, teacher effectiveness, school-wide initiatives, and focus groups based on teachers’ self-reported needs 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  We continue to employ a UFT Teacher Center specialist and Peer Collaborative Teacher to support teachers in the backwards planning of their curriculum maps, the implementation of literacy strategies, the analysis of student data so that they can provide students with appropriately challenging course material, and the implementation of strategies aligned with the Common Core. This UFT Teacher Center Coach and Peer Collaborative Teacher attend monthly professional development sessions offered through the UFT Headquarters and the Affinity network, which are focused on coaching practices and the implementation of instructional strategies. These skills and strategies are then shared with teachers during school-based professional development sessions.  We have teachers who have assumed the role of teacher leaders within our building. These teacher leaders facilitate inquiry team studies, and provide assistance with the development and implementation of Common Core aligned curricula and instructional strategies. 6   Teachers engage in monthly department team meetings to use protocols for looking at student work and analyzing the effectiveness of the implementation of instructional strategies focused on research and argument-writing skills. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 7  Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 377,109 0 0 0 3,824,024 X X Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) section 5 section 5 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs 8   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Kingsborough Early College Secondary School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Kingsborough Early College Secondary School, will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology  providing parents with information through School Messenger and training through Parent Informationals, so  that they have the knowledge necessary to become involved in the planning and decision-making fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership through the use of the advisory program, School Messenger and the Jupitergrades grading system to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State, and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent-related programs, meetings, and other activities in a format and in languages that parents can understand 0  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills, and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed   1   conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee supporting or hosting Family Day events   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand.  Offering monthly learning-walk opportunities for teachers based upon grade levels so that parents come enter classrooms and observe different school initiatives and learn how to support student learning at home.  Creating parent-teacher workshops held once a month held after SLT and PTA meetings during which time teachers and parents will team up to discuss and practice strategies that can be implemented at home to support student academic growth. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Kingsborough Early College Secondary School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 2 respecting cultural, racial and ethnic difference implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards  using academic learning time efficiently    offering high quality instruction in all content areas  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and Parent Compact   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences  Providing monthly opportunities to parents to attend learning-walks and parent-teacher workshops. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 3  Provide general support to parents by:    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend) sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act () and Title I programs Parents and guardians will: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor their child’s attendance and ensure that their child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when their child is absent  ensure that their child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of their child and his/her age check and assist their child in completing homework tasks, when necessary read to their child and/or discuss what their child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes) set limits to the amount of time their child watches television or plays video games     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time volunteer in their child’s school or assist from their home as time permits  encourage their child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with their child   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to their child’s education  communicate with their child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Team share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of their child   Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities    attend school regularly and arrive on time complete my homework and submit all assignments on time follow the school rules and be responsible for their actions 4     show respect for themselves, other people, and property try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully always try their best to learn 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 21 School Name 2630 Benson Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11214 Borough Brooklyn School Number 468 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Tracee Murren Coach Sarah Gotimer ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Sandy Gelfman Teacher/Subject Area Therese Aristide/Special Education Teacher/Subject Area Gervasi/ELA Related-Service Provider Carol Napolitano Superintendent Fred Walsh Assistant Principal Elizabeth Mohammad Natasha Delbe Coach Jessica Spinosa School Counselor Marisa Genco Parent Anna Lembersky Parent Coordinator Genevieve Mercaldo Field Support Center Staff Member Jocelyn Santana Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 1 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 6  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 632 Total number of ELLs 11 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.74% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) n/a Program TBE Lang. 0 K 1 2 3 4 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? In order to determine the literacy skills and reading levels of the ELL students, KECSS uses the Degrees of Reading Power Assessment (DRP), the Achieve 3000 LevelSet reading assessment, Word Identification and Spelling Test (WIST), and the Writing and Reading Assessment Profile (WRAP). All assessments provide literacy grade level equivalencies. According to data received from these assessments, our ELL students are underperforming in the areas of literacy. On average they are reading on grade levels that are three years below their current grade level. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 7  To address this issue teachers are focusing on applying literacy strategies across all content areas. Students also receive dedicated reading instruction at least three times per week in addition to their English Language Arts program. The ELL teacher also pushes in to their ELA classes to provide additional support twice per week. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In order to fully assess the ELL program, formative and summative data is collected and analyzed by the Inquiry Team. Data will be collected from interim assessments such as classroom tests and MOSL Baseline Assessments and Mid-term examinations while summative data will be obtained from the NYSITELL and State and Local Assessments. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Summative data is used to identify students' areas of struggle and place them in level-specific reading intervention classes designed to target their specific literacy needs. Students also attend lunch tutoring and Saturday school intervention. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSLAT Assessment, tests for English proficiency in speaking, listening, reading and writing. Data collected from this assessment is used for determining the support each student needs based on his/her proficiency levels. According to data collected from the 2015 NYSLAT 29% (2/7) students are Entering learners, 71% (5/7) students are Expanding learners. On average our students' area of strength is speaking and their area of weakness is writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The school uses letters, JupiterGrades messages, parent-teacher conferences, SLCs to inform parents and staff of findings. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. At KECSS we utilize an ungraded program for stand alone services. All 11 ELL students are serviced simultaneously and travel together as a group. 72% (8/11) are categorized as expanding and 18% (2/11) are categorized as emerging. b. TBE program. If applicable. We do not have a TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. We do not have a DL program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 8  Emerging students will receive 90 minutes of stand alone and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction. Expanding students will receive 180 of integrated ENL/ELA instruction. Commanding students will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction. Instructional minutes for the ELL program are incorporated into the weekly students’ schedule as well as the weekly teacher’s schedule. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. As a free standing ELL pull out program content specific instruction is not provided in this setting. The curriculum used in the ELL classroom focuses on student learning in the areas of reading, writing, listening and speaking. Within each content classroom teachers provide instructional and curricula supports to facilitate student learning. English Language Arts At KECSS the focus of the English Language Arts curriculum is the development of student interest in literature as well as their ability to understand, appreciate, and analyze a multitude of texts including non-fiction texts as per the demands of the CCLS. To achieve this goal, students will read numerous pieces of literature, in multiple genres such as non-fiction, poetry, drama, and contemporary young adult fiction. Students will learn strategies to independently evaluate and respond to text. Critical thinking skills will be fostered as students engage in meaningful, student-driven discussions, participate in Socratic seminars and Hot Seats, and complete a number of independent and collaborative projects. Additional independent courses of study will be offered for students identified for enrichment. Mathematics At KECSS mathematics courses are designed to assist students see and understand math as an integral and fascinating part of life. Our goal is to create a math environment where students are empowered to explore the many possibilities of problem solving. The mathematics curriculum has been created to ensure exposure to and mastery of numeration concepts, algebra, geometry, measurement and statistics and probability. Students will be afforded the opportunity to utilize manipulatives to construct, comprehend and analyze mathematical theory. They will also learn to verbalize, justify and present their arithmetic cognition, through journal writing and Socratic Seminars. Science The science program at KECSS is designed to make sure that all students including ELLs achieve mastery in the sciences. Curricula material is delivered using a combination of lecture and laboratory course work. To support and encourage the ELL student, reading and writing scaffolding techniques are used. The teachers also ensure student achievement with the use of active learning strategies, hands on experimentation, group work and discussions. Students are encouraged to use their listening, speaking, reading and writing skills to demonstrate their comprehension of the material being taught in class. Social Studies The Social Studies courses at KECSS are created to assist students as they explore the history of the United States as well as the world. To ensure that they internalize concepts such as: US expansion, imperialism, industry growth and government policies ELL students will participate in activities such as role plays, timelines, writing and the creation of scripts, all of which are designed to enable them to fully grasp the concept of life at different times in history. Students will also read books which have taken place during specific time periods, and which will help them further understand the time period they are studying. Socratic Seminars will facilitate higher order thinking skills, while allowing the development of listening, speaking, reading and writing. All curricula used at KECSS has been aligned to the common core learning standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students at KECSS are not currently evaluated in the native language. As per the recommendations of the LPT, the results of the NYSITELL and the parent program requests, students are instructed and assessed in English. 9  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status At KECSS differentiation of instruction for the ELL population is not based on years of ELL service but rather on NYSELAT proficiency levels as well as academic data obtained from New York State Content assessments. To address the individual needs of all students in the ELL classroom the teacher focuses on the individual student’s content knowledge. The Inquiry Team has analyzed the academic data for all ELL students in order to determine their areas of strength and deficiency. According to data collected, these students are proficient in reading for information and understanding, while they struggle with literary response and expression. To address this issue the students have been placed in book club designed to help them use content clues to find the meaning of unknown words and understand how the structure of a passage aides in comprehension. The use of active learning strategies such as, games, skits, songs, partner interviews and structured conversation with classmates provides a low stress educational environment where the SIFE student can feel academically and socially successful. ELL and former ELL students receive extended time and a separate location. Former ELL students receive 90 minutes per week of ENL instruction. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers have been using leveled fiction and non-fiction texts based on each student's independent reading levels, grade and age, this makes curriculum content and skills accessible to all learners especially SWDs. Individual student interaction with these leveled texts is supplemented by guided readings conducted by the teacher with more challenging, instructional level texts. Students continuously engage in a structured independent reading program both inside the classroom and at home to help them practice and develop fluency, vocabulary, and reading comprehension skills. Students are also provided with differentiated tasks and assignments, such as Venn diagrams, graphic organizers, and revised task prompts, which are designed to help scaffold abstract concepts for struggling students. Teachers also use technology such as Achieve 3000, SMARTBoards and online curricula to engage students in learning. Teachers use ongoing formative assessments, such as exit slips, homework assignments, and individual/small-group conferences to help track areas of growth and areas still in need of support. During these conferences, teachers and students outline individualized goals and action plans aligned to their IEPs to help ensure student success of SWDs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In order to address the needs of ELL-SWDs while ensuring that they are in the least restrictive environment, students will participate in ELL instruction designed to increase reading, writing, listening and speaking. SWD's academic placement, is based on recommendations of the school based support team during IEP meetings. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. In all content classes teachers and students monitor the benchmarks that students have mastered for each unit using a benchmarking/learning goal template. Students who have not mastered the benchmarks or standards of the curriculum will set goals and action plans with the teacher to ensure mastery of the content. Students who have demonstrated mastery of the content will be compacted out the curriculum and given enrichment activities that utilize more advanced concepts. English Language Arts Three hours each Friday has been dedicated to ELA academic intervention for students. Student data is analyzed by the Inquiry team and each child is assigned to remediation or acceleration program depending on his/her strengths and 0  weaknesses. Students also receive one to one or small group tutoring in afterschool reading programs. The programs currently used by KECSS include: Book Clubs, Literature circles and Achieve 3000 Mathematics Students who are deficient in Mathematics have been assigned to Mathematics intervention programs on Fridays. The curriculum that is used on Fridays has been created by the mathematics teachers to address the specific deficiencies of the population. Students are also given the opportunity to receive one to one and small group tutoring during lunch and after-school. Science Science academic intervention services are provided during class, lunch, pull-out sessions and after-school. During these times students are provided with individualized instruction based on their specific areas of weakness. Social Studies Social Studies academic intervention services are provided during class, lunch, pull-out sessions and after-school. During these times students are provided with individualized instruction based on their specific areas of weakness. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? ELLs will be given more direct reading instruction through their ELA classes. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No ELL programs/services will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. The use of a freestanding ELL program means that our ELL students have access to the same services as all other students. ELLs are invited to participate in all afterschool and supplemental programs such as Achieve 3000, NIA, Enrichment Clusters and after school and Saturday tutoring. All ELL students participate in all activities that occur during the school day. ELLs are also provided with the opportunity to attend academic intervention and tutoring programs during the school day. 57% (4/7) ELL students participate in non mandated afterschool extra-curricular activities. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. In order to provide engaging instruction that appeals to the learning styles of all students including English Language Learners, teachers at KECSS use a variety of instructional materials including text books, articles, traditional blackboards, SMART Boards, laptop/desktop computers, LCD projectors, Audio Labs, TVs, DVDs, overhead projectors and manipulatives. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the ELL classroom the goal is to assist students develop proficiency in academic classes taught in English. The home language is not an "official" part of an ELL classroom but is often used when possible to support the learning of English and of academic content in English. To ensure that English is learnt as quickly as possible it sense to use English exclusively in the classroom. The home language might be used to support academic content learning, but English could be used exclusively, or almost exclusively, for English language learning. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The curriculum that is currently in use by the ESL teacher is designed to meet the age level and grade level of ELL students. Although we use an ungraded classroom model, students are assessed and provided with classroom materials and resources that meets their specific cognitive levels. For SWDs scaffolds such as glossaries and annotations are used to help them access the material on their grade level. The services and support that they receive is based on their proficiency levels as evidenced by the NYSELAT 1  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? In order to provide engaging instruction that appeals to the learning styles of all students including English Language Learners, teachers at KECSS use a variety of instructional materials including text books, articles, traditional blackboards, SMART Boards, laptop/desktop computers, LCD projectors, Audio Labs, TVs, DVDs, overhead projectors and manipulatives. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At KECSS we have instituted a summer bridge program for all newly enrolled students including ELLs. This program is designed to introduce students to the culture, protocols and policies of the school. It also provides students with the opportunity to meet and interact with their teachers in a low-pressure environment. They are encouraged to build relationships with their advisors and meet and socialize with other students prior to beginning the academic year. This relives some of the stress ELL students feel when entering to a new school. They can also seek assistance from the school's guidance counselor Ms. Genco, or the parent coordinator, Ms. Gen Mercaldo. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? In 8 th and 12 th Grade French is offered to our students and in 9 th grade, Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ELL teachers, guidance counselors and assistant principals attended city-wide professional development on ELL initiatives, mandates, and instructional strategies. Our UFT Teachers Center specialist and Peer Collaborative Teachers provide on-going PD and support to our teachers regarding, CCLS curriculum alignment, instructional shifts, and literacy strategies to help work with our students Description of Professional Development Cycle and Teams Advisory Teams Goals: The goals of the Advisory Team Meetings are to: • Reflect and revise existing Advisory units, using student and teacher feedback as a guide • Design new lessons and activities to support the social and emotional needs of students in the Early College Program • Engage in training facilitated by the Advisory Point Person to learn how to facilitate lessons for the following month’s unit 2  • Delegate tasks to Advisory team members in preparation for future activities and units Roles and Responsibilities: • Each Advisory team is assigned an Advisory Point Person, whose responsibilities include: o Updating all Advisory Unit Calendar Templates and Advisory Meeting Agendas on Google Drive o Ensuring that all relevant tasks related to Advisory units and events are delegated and completed by their Advisory team members o Facilitating monthly meetings with their teams (see above) Logistics and Cycles of Feedback and Accountability • Advisory Point People will meet with Liz Mohammad, the Advisory Supervisor, and other Advisory Point People once a month to discuss successes and challenges related to the overall Advisory program, plan revisions to the program, and coordinate events. • All documentation, including meeting agendas and unit templates will be accessible to the staff on Google Drive. • Teachers and students will receive periodic needs assessments and surveys regarding the Advisory program. These survey responses will be used to make revisions to the Advisory program and subsequent units. • Advisors will also receive feedback from our Student Advisory Council meetings, which will occur once a month. The Advisory Council will consist of elected students from each grade, and during these meetings, student members will voice concerns to administration, and will help plan revisions to student-related activities and Advisory curricula. Department Teams: Goals: The goals of the Department Team Meetings are to: • Collaboratively review high-stakes assessments, create item analyses of these assessments, and make revisions to assessments and units in existing curricula to address any gaps in instruction • Revise ATLAS curriculum maps to reflect any revisions and scaffolds and supports put in place for specific student subgroups • Develop common assessments across grades and content areas • Engage in collaborative analysis of student data generated from common assessments to make adjustments to existing curricula • Engage in protocols for looking at student work to identify areas in need of support and to share best practices • Schedule inter-visitations among department members • Engage in planning related to any department-specific initiatives Roles and Responsibilities: Each department will be headed by a Department Chairperson, whose responsibilities include: • Facilitating all department meetings and student work protocols • Finding resources to support departments in their work regarding department-specific initiatives • Facilitating to development of common assessments and curricula revisions • Tracking all meeting agendas and meeting minutes Logistics and Cycles of Feedback and Accountability • Department Chairs will meet with administration once a month to provide feedback from their team meetings, check in about school-wide initiatives, and plan cohesive department meeting agendas for future department meetings. 3  • Departments will set yearly department goals aligned to the school-wide goals, and will collect assessment data to report back on progress towards achieving these goals throughout the year. • Department Chairs will keep documentation of inter-visitations, student work protocols, department initiatives work, etc. on Google Drive Grade Level Teams: Goals: The goals of the grade level team meetings are to: • Identify at-risk students in each grade level • Meet with other grade-level teachers to develop action plans to target these students’ academic, social, and emotional needs • Monitor the progress of these identified at-risk students, and help them accumulate their required credits through the use of intervention strategies Roles and Responsibilities: Each grade level will have a point person who will: • Summarize team meeting notes and send updates to administration after each meeting • Update grade level action plans on Google Drive Logistics and Cycles of Feedback and Accountability • The progress of targeted students will be monitored throughout the year, using progress reports from JupiterGrades as evidence of students’ mastery of benchmarks once a month. • Teachers will be asked to discuss their at-risk students’ progress during their professional conversations with administration three times a year, and will discuss the success and challenges they’re experiencing with these students. • Teacher teams will continuously update the grade level action plan documents to reflect the work and interventions they are putting in place for students, which will be monitored monthly by administration. Our UFT Teacher Center Specialist and Peer Collaborative Teachers have created professional development opportunities tailored to the needs of our teachers. All teachers have received training and support around the implementation of the CCLS. They have been provided with materials to aid them in the modification of their curriculum to address the Common Core. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The UFT Teacher Center Specialist provides professional development sessions on Mondays and Tuesday afternoons for all teachers who are responsible for ELL instruction. The content of these professional development sessions focus on the implementation of the common core, and literacy strategies within the ELL classroom. Records are maintained by the UFT Teacher Center Specialist in the form of agendas and sign-in sheets. 4  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ELL Teacher and the guidance counselor schedule at least two mandatory meetings with the parents of our ELL students. More meetings are scheduled if the child is under-performing in his or her core content classes. At these meetings, student goals, class participation and progress towards the command of the language are discussed. Content area teachers are also invited to be a part of these meetings. Translation services are provided through the DOE as needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. In an effort to implement the Title I, Part A parental involvement requirements KECSS where possible will provide full opportunities for the participation of parents with limited English deficiency, parents with disabilities, and parents of migratory children, including providing information and school reports required under section 1111 of the ESEA in an understandable and uniform format and, including alternative formats upon request, and, in a language parents understand. The school will involve the parents of children served in Title I, Part A programs in decisions about how the 1 percent of Title I, Part A funds reserved for parental involvement is spent. These decisions are made monthly at the School Leadership Team and PTA meetings. All parents of ELL students are invited to attend. KECSS also promotes parental involvement by fostering meaningful communication involvement student academic learning and other school activities. This is achieved through the advisory program which provides the parents of ELL students with a point person to serve as the liaison between the home and the school. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. n/a 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Tracee Murren, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: KECSS School DBN: 21K468 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Tracee Murren Natasha Delbe Elizabeth Mohammad Title Principal Assistant Principal Genevieve Mercaldo Parent Coordinator Sandy Gelfman ENL/Bilingual Teacher Anna Lembersky Parent Traci Gervasi/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Therese Aristide/Special Education Sarah Gotimer Jessica Spinosa Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Marisa Genco School Counselor Fred Walsh Jocelyn Santana Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 21K468 School Name: Kingsborough Early College School Superintendent: Fred Walsh The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Sandra Gelfman ENL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. KECSS uses information provided by families on the Home Language Identification Survey, and information provided on student emergency contact cards to determine what translations are necessary. Currently we communicate with parents in Russian, Uzbec, Mandarian, Spanish and Urdu Oral and written translations are provided by DOE translation services, parent volunteers and teachers. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 8  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Albanian Mandarin Chinese (ANY) Cantonese Arabic Russian Azberbaijani Bengali 700 106 2 0 27 0 5 54 1 3 76 11.51 .22 0 2.93 0 .54 5.86 .11 .33 694 107 4 4 20 3 7 54 1 3 75.35 11.62 .43 .43 2.17 .33 .76 5.86 .11 .33 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent-teacher conference letters September 2017, February 2018, NYCDOE Translation Services All documents will be given to the parent coordinator a month ahead of the scheduled date of dissemination to ensure timely provision to families. Permission Slips September 2017 - June 2018 NYCDOE Translation Services All documents will be given to the parent coordinator a month ahead of the scheduled date of dissemination to ensure timely provision to families. Course syllabi September 2017 NYCDOE Translation Services All documents will be given to the parent coordinator a month ahead of 9  PTA Announcements September 2017 - June 2018 NYCDOE Translation Services the scheduled date of dissemination to ensure timely provision to families. All documents will be given to the parent coordinator a month ahead of the scheduled date of dissemination to ensure timely provision to families. Testing Schedules December 2017, May 2018 NYCDOE Translation Services All documents will be given to the parent coordinator a month ahead of the scheduled date of dissemination to ensure timely provision to families. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum nights September 2017 Parent-Teacher Conferences September 2017 Student Led Conferences March 2018 interpretation service(s)? NYCDOE Translation Services NYCDOE Translation Services NYCDOE Translation Services Attendance Meetings September 2017 - June 2018 NYCDOE Translation Services PTA Meetings September 2017 - June 2018 NYCDOE Translation Services School Leadership Team September 2017 - June 2018 NYCDOE Translation Services 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. NYCDOE Translation Services Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We will dedicate time in the first staff meeting to review this regulation as part of the staff's training in all Chancellor's Regulations on the first day of school. 0  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The KECSS Parent Coordinator distributes the Bill of Rights in multiple languages to families to ensure they are informed of their right to translation services. All important notices are translated during Open House information session and orientation meetings. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? To gather information about the quality and availability of translation services we will survey members of the PTA, SLT and parents at our open school nights. 1 
