 13K483 School Name: THE URBAN ASSEMBLY SCHOOL FOR LAW AND JUSTICE Principal: MERILEE VALENTINO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Urban Assembly School for Law and Justice 331300011483 9 - 12 283 Adams Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 School Number (DBN): 13K483 718-858-1160 Phone Number: 718-858-4733 Fax: Merilee Valentino mvalentino@sljhs.org Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: MerileeValentino Sarah Finucane Jerry Parsons Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: DanielleCardarelli Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: LatishaLee Emily Joachim n/a Affinity Schools CUNY/UA Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Fred Walsh Superintendent: 333 7th Avenue - 7th Floor NY, NY 10001 FWalsh@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212) 356-3754 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Affinity Group Alexandra Anormaliza FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5618 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) MerileeValentino Sarah Finucane Jerome Parsons LatishaLee Emily Joachim Danielle Cardarelli-Badio Ricardo Young Valerie Daniels *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Assistant Principal/SLT Chair Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent   Name MikoSimmons-Jones Stacey Palmer Kennedy Morales Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Student Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Urban Assembly School for Law & Justice (SLJ) believes that the success of each student is a community responsibility. Staff, families and partners work together to challenge and support students with a curriculum that respects their right to learn at high levels and with enrichment services that every student deserves. SLJ delivers personal attention in an empowering environment that fosters intellectual independence and civic engagement. Equipped with an understanding of law and social justice, SLJ’s students, most of whom come from the city’s historically least served communities, graduate ready to succeed in college and effect change in society.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Based on the idea that law is a captivating lens for learning, and that the skills necessary to a legal professional are universal, we offer a rigorous academic program that engages students through issues of law and social justice. Teachers plan collaboratively so that what students learn in one class is strongly reinforced by instruction in other classes. Work is project-based, challenging, and heavily infused with reading and writing. Evaluation methods are transparent so that students can track their own progress. We continue to offer a rigorous set of courses for our students ranging from Constitutional Law to Environmental Science to a college level course called Research Writing. We also spent quite a bit of time customizing our curriculum this year for all learners, continually returning to our curriculum maps and lesson plans to find even greater and more authentic points of access to the curriculum for students. Where we see this working well is in our ability to present students who need an extra challenge an increased level or rigor (note the increase of 75+on Regents exams and improved AP scores), but where we still need to work on developing strong practice is with our IEP (individual education plan) population of students. This connects to the Framework for Great Schools promotion of rigorous instruction; we have exceeded in expanding AP offerings and our departments have worked to craft Common Core-aligned curricula. Because we are a small school, every student is known and this enables our community to build strong bonds of Trust across classrooms and teachers and students and parents. Teachers are aware of every student's strengths and needs. Our belief in the importance of interpersonal relationships between students and staff is exemplified in our nationally recognized Advisory program, through which every teacher is a faculty advocate for 15 to 18 students and is the liaison to those students' parents, guardians, and families. Additionally all teachers participate in Kid Talk, a weekly discussion in which two or three struggling students are discussed candidly and in depth so that the entire staff can intervene to give them the help they need. The Kid Talk process often involves the student as well as family and other community members. At SLJ, we believe that school is not a rehearsal for life, it is life. Students need to understand the relevance of what they are learning—either because they see its value in their own lives, its utility in the professional world or, more abstractly, because they realize it is part of the process of "becoming successful". We have developed a number of community and corporate partnerships through which our students interact with the professional world and become aware of those vital connections. Our partners include the Urban Assembly, Cravath, Swaine & Moore LLP, Brooklyn Law School , the Red Hook Community Justice Center , the U.S. District Court, the U.S. Attorney, and the Vera Institute of Justice. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. About 18% of the students we serve are Students With Disabilities (SWDs). Additionally, the majority of our students enter high school several grade levels behind in their literacy and numeracy skills. According to the DRP (Degrees of Reading Power) Assessment administered in September, 63% of 9th graders, 75% of 10th graders, and 64% of 11th graders are well below grade level.  o Of the 11th graders, 74 out of 100 (74.0%) have passed three exams with a score of at least 65. This was an improvement from our 2017 where our 2019 cohort had 62% pass three exams with a score of at least 65. 49 out of 100 (49.0%) have passed the Common Core aligned Algebra I Regents with a score of at least 70. This was a decline from 2017 Report where our 2019 cohort had 58% pass the Common Core aligned Algebra I Regents with a score of at least 70. One of our school-wide goals continues to be reaching College Readiness. We have restructured our math department, including 0  staff changes, three co-taught courses in 9th grade Algebra, and an 11th grade curriculum that more directly prepares students for making a College readiness score. For our SWDs (Students With Disabilities) we have also rearranged programming to ensure the same teacher for the core Algebra class and the SETTS support class. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In reviewing Regents data, credit accumulation, the NYCDOE school survey, and School Quality Guide, SLJ has made the most progress in communicating high expectations to students; this is evidenced by the NYC School School survey section on rigorous instruction. Areas of continued focus include how all students--namely students with IEPS--show evidence of engagement in rigorous curricula by increased levels of performance on exams. We are also explicitly teaching Social Emotional Learning skills, 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 13K483 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 449 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 24 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 40 28 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 77.0% % Attendance Rate 67.7% % Reduced Lunch 1.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 24.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.17 3% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 90% 85% 90.0% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 104 109 4 89.6% 8.7% 16.9% 67.3% 2.4% 4.0% 4 3% 6.3 N/A N/A 86% 90% 93.3% 15% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Greatest Accomplishments Law and Justice has been successful in establishing high expectations for all students and in developing a mindset that all students can see themselves as college bound while working towards high school graduation. This is reflected in the established systems of communication between grade team structures and in the academic departments. In addition, the school has established an advisory system that disseminates expectations to both students and parents on a consistent basis. Through the development of grade-level, department, and advisory systems, teachers have been able to collaborate upon and execute curriculum that fosters success. Students can visualize and obtain success through the critical thinking and academic skills utilized in the themes of law and justice. Also, through the development of “Kid Talk,” (a weekly meeting in which grade teams identify students in need and strategize about interventions) grade teams have been able to continually identify and support students requiring additional intervention services. Our academic evaluation has historically blended in-house assessments with those mandated by the city and state as system-wide measures of student performance. Over the past year, we have continued to fine tune and implement a variety of interim assessments, e.g. the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) and Mock Regents Exams as well as the Regents Predictive in order to track student progress and to use results to revise curriculum as needed and make adjustments for varying types of learners or areas of academic deficiencies. Our Department and Grade Teams are then able to review the data and make adjustments to curriculum and to confer with students regarding their progress and goal set. We have decided to add a fifth AP course to our Curriculum Scope and Sequence both as a result of the success we are having with our students who are enrolled in our current AP course load but also for two other reasons: In the past two years, we have seen a significant number of students enrolling at SLJ who have already passed one major Science Regents course (usually Living Environment, but sometimes Earth Science) upon entry. The data indicates that the majority of these students are also high achievers in their Freshman and Sophomore courses at SLJ, so we see a need to offer a more rigorous course to this group of students. We’ve also found that our students in AP classes in grade 12 have been more successful in their courses since we created the AP Boot camp and aligned “AP Skills” across the AP content area courses. It seem reasonable for us to believe that if we are able to offer an AP course in the younger grades and embed these AP Skills in that course, then these students will have an even stronger foundation for success in this AP course as well as subsequent courses. We will not use this course to track into the Senior Year AP courses, but we will use it to support a population of students who we believe can be successful in AP courses earlier in their high school career. In the 2017-18 school year, 118 students took one or more of our 5 Advanced Placement courses. This includes 61 seniors, and 57 underclassmen. 3  At SLJ, we believe that part of rigorous instructional environment is a shared belief in academic goals. One of our most important academic goals is that all students graduate from our high school with a strong post-secondary plan that will ensure a path to 21 st Century success for each graduate. To show how we’re meeting that goal, here’s data on the Class of 2018 from our College and Career team:  Of students matriculating to college (not counting the three students in career training or military), 22% are attending a two year college and 78% are attending a four year. Of the students attending a two year college, 81% are enrolled in a support program to help them in persisting in college. Of the students attending a four year college, 69% are enrolled in a support program.  Of the 3% of students not attending college, these students are either joining the military or planning on pursuing a career training program.  75 / 105 in the Class of 2018 earned CR on Math and English (71%) The priority need in the area of Rigorous Instruction is our ability to create the right kind of scaffolding for all types of learners. Our school’s IEP population has grown a little each passing year. Our school started with an IEP population of 2%. We are now at 17%, and our work to create differentiated, common core units and assessments that allows access to all of these learners continues. While we have progressed in supporting credit accumulation and students meeting graduation requirements, our refined goal is for all students to make College Readiness scores. The priority need in the area of Rigorous Instruction is our ability to graduate students who are college-ready. According to the 2016-17 School Quality Snapshot 68% of SLJ students graduated high school with College Readiness scores on the Common Core ELA and Common Core Algebra I Regents Exams. Additionally, in our Class of 2017, only 11% of students with IEPs graduated with a Regents diploma. According to the school survey data, 83% of teachers say that students feel challenged, and 64% of students say that they are challenged in their classes. While college and career preparation is infused throughout the school community, the disconnect between these conversations about post-secondary plans, and students’ college readiness according to the data indicates a need to tighten up alignment of assessments and scaffolds across the school to the Common Core Standards. Part 2 – Annual Goal 4  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 we will effectively implement UDL strategies and increase the level of rigor and Common Core alignment across all classes, as evidenced by a 5% increase in College Readiness scores of 70+ on the CC Algebra Regents Exam and 75+ on the CC English Regents Exam. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Interim assessments. Mock Regents exams in November, March, and May and in class tasks. Regents students. Sept 2018-June 2019 Department meetings to review student work to identify greatest areas of strength and struggle. Regents students. Sept 2018-June 2019 Department Leaders and AP of Instruction Department Leaders and AP of Instruction Grade team kid talk meetings wherein the team reviews student work, IEP, anecdotals, and interview notes. Consideration of access and engagement for all learners. Students with IEPs Sept 2018-June 2019 Grade Team Leaders and teachers Collaborative Planning Time wherein teachers use UDL to plan for providing access for all students. Students with IEPs Professional development linking formative assessments to summative assessments. Intervisitations focused on engagement and providing clear criteria and feedback that pertains to lesson objectives and supporting all learners in ICT classrooms. All teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Sept 2018-June 2019 ICT pairings Department teams Coaching ICT pairings by AP of Instruction and Special Education Department Leader. All teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 AP of Instruction & Special Education Department Leader 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Regular communication via email and mailings about assessments, parent workshops at PTA meetings and Parent Engagement evenings. In September all grade teams met with their respective families to outline instructional expectations for the year. Every marking period we share assessment charts outlining unit objectives and scholarly, formative, and summative assessments. The PTA and SLT look at student work and actual Regents Exams to examine alignment and preparation. This year, the math and English departments are sponsoring curriculum night to engage families in thinking about college readiness. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 6  We will create common planning time in every teacher’s program so that s/he can meet with co teachers as well as department members multiple times a week to plan and refine units. All teachers will be given the Circular 6 duty of CPT only. Department leaders will meet weekly to plan common agendas and to identify best practices – intervisitations, etc. CPT teams will also have protocols for reviewing student work and looking at interim assessment data.  Teacher Leaders charged with the responsibility of implementing shared professional development plans.  Curricular materials (student texts and documents) to supplement our curriculum  Per session for planning, curriculum development, data analysis, etc.  Materials for parent workshops.  Schedule adjustments to create a common planning period for all departments and a grade team meeting time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January of 2019, all Departments will have established a structure for tracking student progress on Common Core aligned assessments and a plan for using that information in the spring term. Eighty five percent of students will have passes the Common Core English Exam with a College Readiness score. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Classroom observations and interim assessment data. Teacher Leader agendas and department agendas. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The advisory system at Law and Justice aids in the development of school tone and culture. During this period of time, students can develop closer relationships with peers and their advisor to support emotional and social needs as well as receiving academic guidance. The advisor is the school's liaison to the student's family and the student's most strident advocate. That advocacy takes the form of communicating with other teachers concerning issues that may impact academic performance, keeping track of their graduation and college readiness, and providing a safe space for them in the school building. Also, advisory groups participate in significant academic and non-academic enrichment activities. While there has been a long history of the advisory structure, there has been an increased need to more explicitly teach the hidden curriculum of Social Emotional Literacy. In the 2017-2018 school year we applied and received a grant to implement the Urban Assembly's Resilient Scholars Program (RSP) across all 9th grade advisories. The 9th and 10th grade teams will continue to implement the RSP currriculum and all Grade Team Leaders have been charged with the goal of increasing the space and quality of advisory lessons that focuses on Social Emotional development. Academic and behavioral interventions with students are often guided by regular examinations of data we mandate to individual staff members in their job descriptions or to staff teams who convene virtually or in-person through standing meetings that are embedded in the calendar. We have a Values Tracking Spreadsheet that is updated daily based on students’ progress towards our community’s goals of 100% Professionalism (Timeliness, Dress Code, Appropriate Classroom Behaviors) and Positive Culture Building (Positive Interactions with Peers, Positive Interactions with Adults, Positive Interactions with Outside Community Members) and we created an incentives program designed to praise and reward those student who make good choices most of the time. The staff had an end of year meeting to review school culture and identify areas for improvement. Additionally, as we have continued to have more students with severe emotional needs, we have recognized the importance of specialized training. In the Spring of 2018 we had 8 staff members--Social Workers, Deans, Assistant Principal of Engagement, Special Education teachers, general education teachers--participate in the TCIS (Therapeutic Crisis Intervention In Schools) training. This team has worked to develop a plan for turn-keying their learning to enhance the capacity of their respective teams in preventing and responding to crisis behavior. While the school has increased vigilance in addressing and tracking student infractions, we have observed an increase in suspensions and repeat behaviors. In the 2017-2018 school year, there was a significant increase in classroom incidents. According to the School Quality Guide, the overall positive percentage for classroom behavior is 67%. The School Quality Guide also indicates a 60% positive percentage for preventing bullying. We believe that there is a 8  relationship between how students perceive their classmates' behavior in following rules inside of the school and how this carries over to interactions outside of the physical school community in social media platforms. Our school attendance goals remains to be over 91% every day. Last year our yearly attendance rate was 89.6%. While some of this percentage drop was attributed to LTAs, we also have a growing population of students who are chronically absent, falling between 80-90%. This year we will utilize the Dexpro Attendance Heat Map to monitor individual student attendance trends and will ask advisors to be more vigilant in outreach with daily absences. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students' sense of belonging and ownership of their learning will improve, as evidenced by an increase of 7% in students with over 90% attendance, from 68% to 75%. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Grade teams will conduct ongoing Kid Talk. During kid talk teachers look at student work, review teacher and student questionnaires, examine attendance data, and behavior anecdotals. Attendance team meets weekly to review daily and weekly attendance and students of concern. Grade teams will assess student data for respective advisories to make strategic proactive decisions at the beginning of the year and implement interventions at interim points throughout the year. Student Student Support team will engage in ongoing assessment of student progress, as evidenced by infractions, Suspension data, and teacher anectodals. The SST will use this data to inform Professional Development for the entire staff and any individualized supports needed for cohorts of students or teachers. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Struggling students 9/18-6/19 Principal and grade team leaders Absent students Advisors Student Support Team Weekly, 9/18-6/19 Weekly grade team meetings Weekly meetings Attendance team Principal and grade team leaders Social workers, deans, grade team leaders, administrators Attendance team leads incentives, including Friday out lunch for perfect weekly attendance, monthly out lunch for perfect monthly attendance, golden semester breakfasts for perfect semester attendance, and most improved raffles. Attendance team Ongoing Attendance team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Daily phone calls for absent students. Individualized meetings. PTA Meetings on Engagement, Parent Open Houses and meetings with teachers. Attendance data sent to families.Throughout the year, the Student Support Team will facilitate targeted support meetings with families to discuss goals and supports for individual students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 0  Human resources: Grade team meetings will allow for bi weekly professional development aimed at supporting advisors; weekly Attendance meeting attended by Principal, AP of Engagement, Social Workers, Secretary, and Parent Coordinator. Incentives from budget. Conduct parent workshops with topics that include emotional supports that are needed to improve the performance of students; Parent Involvement Funds. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the end of Term One (January), the Student Support Team and Teacher Leaders will review attendance data with a goal of 80% of students maintaining 90% attendance or higher. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS, DEXPRO Attendance Heat Map Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The School for Law and Justice was founded with a strong belief in the distributive leadership model. Grade Team and Department Leaders meet weekly with the administrative team to set agendas aligned to the school’s year-long goals. Teacher teams implement plans to support students through refining curriculum, looking at student work protocols, Kid Talk protocols, and revisiting grade-wide strategies and expectations. Each grade team is led by a teacher, and has at least one member of the Special Education team represented. Additionally, Special Education teachers work within one content area department, so that they are able to support the vertical alignment of curriculum and scaffolds for all learners. The School for Law and Justice continues to develop its Collaborative Team Teaching model to meet the needs of Students with Disabilities as well as implement a transitions program to support those students in their efforts to establish a successful career path through college or job training programs . The school currently employs five Special Education teachers who have been working with the academic departments to differentiate scope and sequence along with daily lesson plans. The school values differentiation and individualized learning targets for each student and this process can be seen in all classrooms. There has been an identified need to develop the curriculum of every class at Law and Justice to offer the depth of instruction that meets the needs of a mixed-ability classroom. The presence of the ICT model at the school has created an opportunity for a greater discourse among all staff to focus on differentiation of classroom activities, project-based learning, and assessments. This will support the school and its students as the percentage of Special Education students has increased since its inception in 2004. The NYCDOE School Survey shows a 92% for cultural awareness and inclusive classroom instruction. Our Quality Review also indicates a "Well Developed" rating for Collaborative teachers. This illustrates the strength in our ICT teams. We also administer a mid-year survey to staff that collects data and qualitative data is collected from conferences with teachers in debriefing observations and at end of year and beginning of year one on one conferences. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 teacher teams will collaboratively analyze student performance and implement effective UDL targeted supports, as evidenced by a 5% increase average credit accumulation across cohorts. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will review IEPs to assess benchmark goals and strategies and to monitor progress through year. Special Education team will lead PD on effectively using IEPs to plan for the year. All teachers September 2018 Grade Team Leaders ICT partnerships will share best practices through intervisitations and PD in grade team meetings. All teachers During meetings, ICT teams will refine curriculum units and engage in a structured protocol to ensure alignment with the selected Common Core standards. All teachers Departments will facilitate interim assessments (mock Regents exams) and review data to make strategic instructional decisions for students with IEPs. Professional development sessions with ICT pairs on UDL design, models of ICT partnership, and CPT models. ICT Pairs, Departments, students with IEPs ICT pairings Principal, AP, Special Education Department Leader, Teacher Leaders Principal, AP, Department Leaders Department Leaders September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 AP of Instruction, Special Education Department Leader 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Use of Parent Engagement Nights to facilitate conversations about student progress, including transcript review of previous credit accumulation and progress toward graduation and College Readiness. Explicit communication with families of students with disabilities in advising phone calls, IEP meetings, and parent engagement night. Review of program offerings and support types in SLT and PTA meetings. Principal, Assistant Principal of Engagement, and Assistant Principal of Instruction lead planning of Professional Development and strategic family meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 3  Teachers will have additional opportunities to earn per session for participation in afterschool professional development sessions provided by the network and by the school. The most significant resource provision is schedule adjustments to provide common non teaching periods so that all ICT teams will meet during their common planning blocks, with the support of our AP of Instruction and Department Leaders. Additionally, our Teacher Leaders earn per session for attending additional meetings to prepare them to lead their respective teams. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. ICT teams will use the ICT rubric for effective practice. At the beginning of the year, experienced pairs will do a self assessment and then conduct goal setting for the year. All pairs will check in on their progress in November and in February. ICT teams will videotape their work and share best practices regularly throughout the year 2. 3. Produce a 5% increase in the passing rate of IEP students in classes mid-way through the year (January). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Practice Regents Exams in January 2019. Classroom observation data. Interim assessment data. Mid-way through the year we will review scholarship data for grades during marking periods 1-3. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Grade Team Leaders and department leaders will meet weekly with the Principal to share outcomes of instructional grade team and department meetings and to develop the agendas and roll out for each weekly team meeting. Meetings will include low inference observations of teaching videos modeling these practices, sharing of best practices within teams, and peer observations. Leadership will be shared among administration and teachers. For 2017-2018 all grade team leaders and teacher leaders were teachers; this demonstrated full implementation of our distributive leadership model. 2016-2017 Advance Evaluation MOTP data revealed that 3d had the smallest percentage (7%) of teachers scoring highly effective as compared with 12% for 3c and 21% for 3b and the largest percentage (29.27%) of teachers scoring developing as compared with 17% for for 3c and 21% for 3b. We focused the work of teacher leaders on our shared instructional goal of increasing the impact of feedback and assessment in the classroom and saw that 22.4% of observations were ranked Highly Effective in 3d. Our 2017-18 data shows the distribution of developing ratings as follows: 29.6% for 1e; 28.5% for 3b; 26.2% for 3c; 25% for 3d. In addition to Advance data, PPO feedback also identified intellectual engagement as an area of focus. The 2017-18 School Quality Guide identifies that 64% of "students say they are challenged in their classes." Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the principal, assistant principal, and teacher leaders will collaboratively create and implement an impactful professional development plan to increase intellectual engagement in the classroom, as evidenced by a 10% increase in average teacher rating in component 3c Engaging Students in Learning. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Grade Team Leaders will meet weekly to share outcomes and to develop the agendas and roll out for each weekly team meeting. Meetings will include low inference observations of teaching videos modeling these practices, sharing of best practices within teams, and peer observations. Grade Teams will regularly look at student work to examine feedback practices and rubrics. Grade teams will also look at IEPs for SWDs to think about individual assessment criteria based on annual goals and appropriate scaffolds and modifications. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers 9/18-6/18 Grade team leaders, APs, Principal Department leaders will identify discipline-specific strategies to support larger school-wide goal. Department Leaders 8/18-6/19 Differentiated coaching for teachers. All teachers will have a direct conversation with evaluator at IPC regarding 3c. Teachers who scored developing have a once weekly coaching session. New teachers have coaches who engage in instructional meetings and opportunities for guided visitations to classrooms exhibiting best practices. Departments will engage in lesson plan studies and task analyses to assess unit design and implementation. Departments will review curricula to identify areas for revision to increase cultural relevance. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers 8/18-6/19 AP of Instruction & Principal AP of Instruction & Principal Teachers 8/18-6/19 Department leaders, AP of instruction, Principal Teachers 8/18-6/19 Department leaders, AP of instruction, Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Ongoing communication with families via email, mailings, and meetings to share assessment information, including access to online gradebook (Pupilpath), assessment charts for each marking period, presentations by teachers at Parent Engagement Evenings. Advisors engage in academic progress communication with families every three weeks. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 6  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. The teacher leadership body makes plan in summer and is paid teacher per session. 2. Teacher Leaders will work with the Principal to create protocols for exploring analysis of best teaching practices. Schedule adjustments are made so that department leaders all have a meeting period 7th period. Department leaders receive per session for their work. Grade team leaders meet weekly in the morning before school and receive per session. 3. PD Days at the beginning of the school year, Election Day in November, January, and June will focus on departments reviewing curriculum and providing feedback to each other. 4. January Regents week will include extended time for grade team, department, and co teaching teams 5. Teachers will use June Regents week to share portfolios or databases of best practices aligned to Danielson and Common Core Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the admin team will review Advance data to assess progress toward moving teacher practice in 3c with the goal of teachers moving from developing to effective. Based upon this data, the admin team will revise PD plans for grade teams, departments, and individual coaching. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Evaluations. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. On the 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey, we had a 4.21 on strong family-community ties. While we had high (90% and above) ratings for communication with families, our lowest score was 78% of families say that they get opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child. This speaks to our continued goal to make parent engagement more interactive and targeted at parent priorities. Our priority has been to think about parent interests and needs to appropriately engage them in events that we have in the school. We have identified that events need to fall in the category of 1) celebrating students or the community (Hispanic Heritage Celebration, Black History Month Celebration, Multi-cultural Celebration, Awards Night); 2) educating families about pertinent issues (such as Safety, cyberbullying, College Financial Aid); or 3) engaging families in understanding academic expectations and supporting students in meeting those goals (curriculum nights, conferences, student presentations). This year we plan to initiate a new event: a Fall Open House for parents to do classroom observations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will deepen our partnership with families, as evidenced by a 10% increase in families' attendance in Parent Engagement events by 10% from 75% of parents to 85%. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Incoming 9th grade Parent interest survey Parents June 2018 Back to school meet and greet aimed at building relationships between teachers and parents. Advisors meeting with parents to learn more about individual student. Parents and community members Sept 2018 AP of Engagement and Parent Coordinator Assistant Principal, parent coordinator, PTA Exec. board Interactive workshops: safety, cyberbullying, enrichment, Common Core Learning Standards, College FInancial Aid. Parents Sept 2018-June 2019 PTA Exec board, Teacher leaders Multi-cultural food and fashion show to foster community and create an opportunity for greater understanding of the various backgrounds of students within the school community. School-wide advisory lessons will engage the student body in participating in the goals of the event. April 2019 Parents and community members Assistant Principal, parent coordinator, PTA Exec. board Parent Engagement Planning meeting to review survey information, data from 17-18, and to map out goals for 18-19. Parents June 2018 PTA Executive Board, Parent coordinator, AP Engagement, Principal Black History Month Celebration Hispanic Heritage Month Celebration Classroom Open House 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Students, parents Students, parents Parents (especially 9th grade) Feb. 2019 Principal, AP, Parent Coordinator Sept. 2018 Principal, AP, Parent October 2018 Coordinator Principal, AP Engagement, Parent Coordinator If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Adams Street Foundation; VOLS (Volunteers of Legal Services) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 9  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The PTA will discuss a variety of events that can be held during the school year and use feedback from parent surveys to guide the development of additional workshops and events. Parents will discuss how to solicit in kind and in material donations. The PTA will ask for parents to volunteer at events (human resources). We use instructional and schedule time so that teachers may engage in outreach and discuss ways to engage families in participating in events. Per session is also used to staff special events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monthly, the Parent Coordinator and Assistant Principal will review the Parent Engagement tracker to assess participation. Quarterly, the Parent Coordinator and Assistant Principal will review parent attendance at events and will work in consultation with the PTA Executive Board to assess the feedback from participants. By January 2019, at least 60% of families will have attended an engagement event Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Assistant Principal and Parent Coordinator will track parent participation in a parent engagement googledoc. This tracks involvement in events and is compared with numbers from the previous school year. This shared tool will help measure progress toward engaging all parents and will foster strategic outreach. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students in lowest third; students who show lack of adequate progress on series of interim assessments; students’ whose DRP scores indicate need for remediation and extra support Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Strategies implemented by instructors are aligned with the Danielson Teaching Framework, Common Core Learning Standards, and best-practices shared by department members. Mathematics Students in lowest third; students who show lack of adequate progress on series of interim assessments Strategies implemented by instructors are aligned with the Danielson Teaching Framework, Common Core Learning Standards, and best-practices shared by department members. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Services are provided before, during, and after the school day as well as on Saturdays for targeted remediation or test preparation. Services are provided before, during, and after the school day as well as on Saturdays for targeted remediation or test preparation. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Students are supported by various instructional settings. This can be implemented in pull-out models, such as small group instruction and individual tutoring, the Integrated Co-Teaching setting, the incorporation of student-teachers to reduce the teacher to student ratio in the classroom, and the integration of community partnerships with classes to provide experiential learning opportunities inside and outside of the classroom setting. Students are supported by various instructional settings. This can be implemented in pull-out models, such as small group instruction and individual tutoring, the Integrated Co-Teaching setting, the incorporation of student-teachers to 1  Science Students in lowest third; students who show lack of adequate progress on series of interim assessments Strategies implemented by instructors are aligned with the Danielson Teaching Framework, Common Core Learning Standards, and best-practices shared by department members. Social Studies Students in lowest third; students who show lack of adequate progress on series of interim assessments Strategies implemented by instructors are aligned with the Danielson Teaching Framework, Common Core Learning Standards, and best-practices shared by department members. reduce the teacher to student ratio in the classroom, and the integration of community partnerships with classes to provide experiential learning experiences inside and outside the classroom setting. Students are supported by various instructional settings. This can be implemented in pull-out models, such as small group instruction and individual tutoring, the Integrated Co-Teaching setting, the incorporation of student-teachers to reduce the teacher to student ratio in the classroom, and the integration of community partnerships with classes to provide experiential learning experiences inside and outside the classroom setting. Students are supported by various instructional settings. This can be implemented in pull-out models, such as small group instruction and individual tutoring, the Integrated Co-Teaching setting, the incorporation of student-teachers to reduce the teacher to student ratio in the classroom, and the Services are provided before, during, and after the school day as well as on Saturdays for targeted remediation or test preparation. Services are provided before, during, and after the school day as well as on Saturdays for targeted remediation or test preparation. 2 integration of community partnerships with classes to provide experiential learning experiences inside and outside the classroom setting. Services are provided in a one-to-one or group setting in the guidance suite. Services are provided before, during, and after the school day. Counseling; Advisory At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) The psychologist will advise staff members involved in academic intervention services of possible academic ability and cognitive issues that could be causing a student difficulties as well as give insight into the accompanying behaviors that are exhibited by students requiring intervention services. 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 9 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The guidance department assesses students and families on an individual basis to determine needs. Money is set aside should students need clothing or hygiene or school supplies. Students are targeted for involvement in after school tutoring and clubs. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. One of the core values of SLJ is a commitment to creating an academically rigorous environment. One way we support teachers in creating this environment is through weekly professional development. Teachers meet several times a week in small teacher groups to develop curriculum, discuss student performance, receive feedback on lessons and execution of lessons, discuss teacher development using the Danielson Framework and other relevant teaching guides, and plan necessary curricula to support a rich academic environment. These opportunities for development include common planning time meetings (CPT) and other forms of professional development such as: Grade Team Meetings Teachers are assigned to grade teams based on the grade they teach. The goals of the grade team structure are to provide teachers with a forum for communication and support in creating a cohesive experience for grade level students. Grade teams will meet weekly on Wednesday afternoons. Department Meetings Each department has weekly meetings to discuss curriculum, review assessments and student work, collaborate on assessments, share best practices, evaluate data sets, and work toward developing a cohesive scope and sequence. Integrated Collaborative Teaching Planning Meetings Teachers will meet weekly with other teachers who teach their subject, special education teachers, and other specialists to plan curriculum, discuss student development, and to create modifications for various learning styles. Instructional Coaching Meetings New and non-tenured teachers are provided with an instructional coach to guide them in curriculum development and classroom management techniques. Coaches observe these teachers at least once weekly and meet with teachers at least once weekly to provide feedback on classroom practices and lesson development. Cravath Planning Days 6  On occasion and when necessary, teachers may request a planning day with their coach, department leader, or a co-teacher. These planning days are meant to give teachers an opportunity to step back from the regular school day in order to reflect on their instructional practices and to plan for upcoming assessments and learning. Requests for these planning days are to be made through your department leader. Hiring Practices Our hiring practices are rigorous and surface the best fit candidates for our school. Every candidate must submit a teaching portfolio including resume and recommendation letters. Once reviewed using our portfolio rubric, the best candidates are called in for interviews. Interview panels are made up of the Principal and other teacher leaders including department and grade team leaders. Additional staff members may also be called to serve on the hiring committee depending on the duties. After the interview, candidates are recommended for demo lessons. Demo lessons are done in front of a class of our students. Students are given feedback forms so that we can get their opinions as well as we consider each candidates rating. Once we have a finalist, the Principal does a final interview and review of the candidate’s credentials. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). SLJ maintains a robust relationship with a number of professional development programs such as Facing History, Math for America, The Institute for Writing and Thinking at Bard, College Board, and Street Law, among others. When funding is needed, a member of the instructional team assists in requesting funds from the school’s professional development budget or writing grants to cover costs. Teachers will work with the principal, assistant principals, instructional coaches, and their colleagues at the grade team and department levels to develop their instructional practice throughout the year. Teachers will spend time at the beginning of the year assessing their practice using the Danielson Framework and setting individual goals for their instruction. Throughout the year, teachers will receive feedback on these goals and have the opportunity to seek professional development in these areas. Each teacher will meet with the principal or assistant principals to develop his or her practice several times throughout the course of the year. These meetings may be discussions based on observations of a lesson, conversations accompanied by student and teacher work from a project or large assessment, inter-visitations to another teacher’s classroom, etc. In every case, they are intended to be collaborative and to offer teachers at all levels opportunities for feedback and growth. Teachers may seek feedback from any one of their colleagues as often as they like, and because usually our colleagues’ classrooms are the best sources of strategies for good teaching, the instructional team encourages teachers to maintain an open door, feedback driven culture. Teachers also have PD opportunities through the Urban Assembly. A cohort of English teachers are participating in a Literacy Thinktank and Science and Social Studies teachers are participating in curricular institutes. Many of our Math and Science teachers are also fellows in Math for America. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 7  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers will work with the principal, assistant principals, instructional coaches, and their colleagues at the grade team and department levels to develop their instructional practice throughout the year. Teachers will spend time at the beginning of the year assessing their practice using the Danielson Framework and setting individual goals for their instruction. Throughout the year, teachers will receive feedback on these goals and have the opportunity to seek professional development in these areas. At SLJ, we seek to use the Danielson Framework not just as an evaluation tool but also as a way to provide a common language for professional conversations and as a means for reflection on our professional practice. For the 2017-2018 school year, our teachers chose to place our instructional focus on Danielson: 3c. Teachers will also seek to develop other areas of their practice based on self and administrative assessments. Component 3c: Engagement in Learning  Virtually all students are intellectually engaged in the lesson.   Lesson activities require high- level student thinking and explanations of their thinking. . Students have an opportunity for reflection and closure on the lesson to consolidate their understanding SLJ teachers will work through and share best practices from all of the components in grade teams and departments - these are run entirely by teachers using inquiry based approaches. These explorations will involve analyzing assessments, student work, videos of classroom instruction, among other things. 8  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5a-TeacherLeader per session 5b-attendance incentives for students 5c-Teacher Leader per session 5d-Teacher Leader per session5e-Parent Involvement; action plan and goals 5a, b. Action plan and goals; AIS Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal $273,794.00 0 0 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local $2,788,605.00 X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 9  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  0   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 1  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 13K483, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The Urban Assembly School for Law and Justice will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 3  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 13K483, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 4  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 5  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 6  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 7  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 8  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 13 School Name Urban Assembly School for Law & Justice Borough Brooklyn School Number 483 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ms. Merilee Valentino Coach Ms. Elizabeth Masalsky ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Karla Rodriguez-Miletksy Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Rachel Rosen, English Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Carly Lyster, SPED Related-Service Provider Superintendent Fred Walsh Assistant Principal Ms. Kristin Ferrales Coach Ms. Tracy Tran School Counselor Ms. Debby Wallace Parent Ms. Miko Simmons Parent Coordinator Mr. Marvin Harris Field Support Center Staff Member Jocelyn Santana Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 9  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 468 Total number of ELLs 10 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 2.14% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013- 1 2 3 4 Lang. 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 14) 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? For all of our incoming students we review their middle school data, which includes 8th grade ELA scores. At the start of the year we administer a series of diagnostic tests: writing and reading comprehension. All students take the DRP (Degrees of Reading Power) test in September, January, and May of each school year to assess reading levels and growth. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 0  Department teams, Grade teams 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Departments review Regents data from the previous year. Grade teams review NYSESLAT data. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Department teams, Grade teams 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. N/A 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The NYSESLAT results and Regents data Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Teacher Leaders, Department teams, Grade teams b. TBE program. If applicable. We have an integrated ENL model. Students are enrolled in an ELL support class and supported in content area humanities classes. c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Paste response to questions here: 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Students are in an ELL support class with our bilingual certified teacher and are supported in their Humanities support courses (Reading Workshop in 9th grade; Constitutional Law in 10th grade; Research Writing Literacy Support in 11th grade). 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The English classes are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Daily lessons and assessments are aligned with individual standards and students work is measured toward the development of these skills. We provide students with specific 1  literacy strategies to successfully attack rigorous fiction and non-fiction texts. These strategies include annotation guides, embedded questions, graphic organizers to structure comprehension, and dialectical journals. Students have access to whole class teacher modeling, small group teacher support, small group collaborative peer support, and pull out for individual or small group instruction or revision. Teachers align objectives to common core learning standards and utilize appropriate scaffolds to support students working toward making progress. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers use a variety of UDL strategies to engage students. For content areas teachers think of multiple methods for students to access the content. In approaching texts and written work, teachers use appropriate modifications. Teachers provide additional time for ELLs. On state assessments--CC and Regents-- testing coordinator ensures ELLs and Former ELLS have extended time. For SIFE students teachers work to engage students in the habits of mind and behavior of a student. Newcomer students are provided additional visual materials. Developing and long term students receive scaffolds that are removed when the student is approaching mastery. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Parallel teaching; literacy strategies, which include annotation procedures, embedded questions and annotations, vocabulary or word boxes; sentence starters or guided outlines for the writing process. Pedagogues use videos, audio books, and online reading (LightSail) to support ELLs. Special Education Coordinator, Carly Lyster, works with principal and programmer to first program SWDs and then confirm that all IEP services are met in program. Students who need ESL instruction receive both IEP services and ELL-specific services. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our current ELL-SWDs are in the ICT classroom, which has two teachers and a paraprofessional. In CPT time, teachers routinely review IEP goals and think about how students will have access to lessons. Teachers zoom in on the targeted support that individual students may need. In the ICT setting there is a heterogeneous roster. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Within the classroom students receive additional literacy strategies and scaffolds. This is designed to help build language competency. Students are also part of mandated tutoring after school. In math students receive strategies for attacking word problems and communicating their numeracy expressions. In science, students recevie content-specific strategies such as CER (Claim, Evidence, Reasoning) to structure writing responses, explicit vocabulary teaching. In social studies, students receive modified textbooks and different ways of learning the content. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Strategic tutoring with academic intervention services embedded within the comprehensive program. We continue to think of how our work across content areas can align to support our students’ needs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. N/A 2  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All students are in heterogeneous classes. Our curriculum is designed to be common core aligned and college preparatory. As such, ELLs have access to rigorous expectations. All students also have the opportunity to engage in enrichment programs, such as ASLAs (After School Learning Academies), support programs, such as mentoring through the Young Women and Men's Initiatives, and special incentive programs, such as Lunch With Lawyers. Students may apply for a range of summer programs, which include internships, experiential learning, pre-college programs, and study abroad. All students have access to tutoring through direct tutoring and homework help. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Teachers use a variety of technology resources--videos, document cameras--to engage students in the learning process. Teachers assess reading levels in diagnostics and use that data to inform selection of appropriate texts and scaffolds for challenging texts. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Interpretation services support parent engagement. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Students receive literacy support through ELL support class. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Teachers use a variety of technology resources--videos, document cameras--to engage students in the learning process. Teachers assess reading levels in diagnostics and use that data to inform selection of appropriate texts and scaffolds for challenging texts. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELL students are invited to participate in the Summerbridge program designed to build a foundation of skills and school connectedness in the summer prior to the beginning of the 9th grade school year. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Spanish. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? N/A 3  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Teachers participate in weekly grade team meetings that focus on the Danielson Framework for teaching. Teachers actively think about knowing all of their students and engaging them in the curriculum. Departments also meet once weekly and participate in curriculum and professional development geared at strengthening access to rigorous curriculum. PD on September 31 and 5; November 7; February 1. Weekly department meetings reviewing student work, revising units to provide access, differentiation, and common core alignment. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Weekly grade team meetings. Guidance team meetings Review of student work exemplars, such as writing pieces. Grade Team, department, and PD Agendas and associated documents. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents are encouraged to participate in monthly PTA meetings. All students have an advisor who acts as the primary liaison between school and home. Throughout the year we actively invite parents into the school building for open school nights, individual parent meetings, special community events, such as the Hispanic Heritage Month Celebration, Black History month celebration, multicultural celebration, and curriculum-related events, such as Memoir Reading night and Election night. Communication of translation services is visible in the entrance to the school and in the main office. In house translation is available for Spanish, Mandarin, and French. DOE services are accessed for other languages. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. All parent contact is logged on online platform (Skedula) accessible to all staff, parents, and students. School maintains a tracking document for parent attendance at conferences, PTA meetings, community events, and curriculum-related events. Targeted outreach of ELL parents is conducted to increase family engagement. Personal phone calls are placed in home language. Interpretation services are available at all events. 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Paste response here: , testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Merilee Valentino School DBN: UA SCHOOL FOR LAW AND JUSTICE Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) 13K483 Title Principal 1/1/01 1/1/01 Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member JOCELYN SANTANA Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) MERILEE VALENTINO KRISTIN FERRALES MARVIN HARRIS KARLA RODRIGUEZ-MILETSKY MIKO SIMMONS RACHEL ROSEN CARLY LYSTER ELIZABETH MASALSKY TRACY TRAN DEBBY WALLACE FRED WALSH 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 13K483 School Name: UA School for Law and Justice Superintendent: Fred Walsh The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Melo Principal's Secretary Yes Stephanie Merilee Marvin Danielle Valentino Harris Cardarelli Interim Acting Principal Parent Coordinator IA AP Engagement No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We review incoming students' preliminary data--ATS records, questionnaires completed at Accepted Students' Night for incoming 9th graders regarding language needs--to assess language provision. We track and explicitly communicate this data to the school staff through our master phone log. We collect data through ATS Report of Preferred language, blue card information, classroom surveys, and incoming students information. 7  Our small school structure and advisory system enables us to develop close relationships with our students and families from the onset of the high school experience. Parents attend an Accepted Students' Night in June and Meet Your Advisor Night in August prior to the start of their 9th graders' year. This enables the school staff to identify families who may need language services in languages other than English. In order to communicate with families we use a variety of strategies. We run reports and update our internal system to communicate to all staff the languages that parents speak. This supports planning for interpretation services. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Bengali Chinese Croatian Haitian Creole English Russian Spanish Uzbek 1 2 3 4 1 10 608 1 64 1 .14 .29 .43 .58 .14 1.44 87.48 .14 9.21 .14 1 2 3 4 1 10 606 1 66 1 .14 .29 .43 .58 .14 1.44 87.19 .14 9.5 .14 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Back to school forms: dress code agreement, consent for photography,attendance contract August 2017 How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We use bi-lingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages, and translation vendor 8  ELLs Entitlement/ Non-entitlement/ September Continuation letters Parent Conferences & Engagement Evening Announcements September, November, March, May and scheduled as needed Letters for administration Throughout the year for translation into non-covered languages. We use DOE Intranet template(s) We use bi-lingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages, and translation vendor for translation into non-covered languages. We use bi-lingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages, and translation vendor for translation into non-covered languages. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences September, November, March, May and scheduled as needed Accepted Students' Night June ELL Orientation September interpretation service(s)? We use bi-lingual staff. For languages for which we do not have an on-site translator, we use the over the phone interpretation services and, as needed, bring in on-site interpreters from the vendor agency. We use bi-lingual staff. We use bi-lingual staff. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We have a list of all bilingual staff members (including support staff such as custodians and staff) that we access in the case of individual student emergencies. We use translation provided by School Messenger. Our main office has the multilingual welcome poster, language id guide, and parent language access and speak cards. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 9  At the beginning of the school year, grade teams will review the regulation and School Language Access Report in grade team meetings while working to consider how to best support students and engage families. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We identify the spoken language of families in our Master Phone Log database and use it as a reference for providing written and oral translation. Staff will ensure that an in-house staff member is available to provide translation. If not, the staff member will access the over-the-phone translation service through the DOE. Parents receive written communication in home language if it is one of 9 DOE languages. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will implement a parent survey mid-year to our parents. Our internal parent engagement tracker also identifies patterns in participation of families who prefer a language other than English. Gather a focus group of families to ask about connectedness to school community, access to curricular resources to support student's academic progress, and meet of needs. 0 
