 23K522 School Name: MOTT HALL IV Principal: MARICA MYRIE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Mott Hall IV Middle School 23K522 332300010522 6-8 School Number (DBN): 1137 Herkimer Street(3rd Floor),BrooklynNY 11233 718-485-5948 Fax: 718-485-5240 Phone Number: MYRIE-FORRESTER,Marica School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: MMyrie4@Schools.NYC.Gov MYRIE-FORRESTER, Marica CHARLES Leaton LEWIS Doris BYRD lorraine FERGUSON Loretta PITKIN Marcia District Information Geographical District: 23 PATE MiatheresaDr Superintendent: 1784 Park Place Brooklyn, New York 11233 Superintendent’s Office Address: MPate@Schools.NYC.Gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 240-3677 Phone Number: 718-385-3768 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 BFitzge2@Schools.NYC.Gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-2382 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name MYRIE-FORRESTER, Marica CHARLES Leaton LEWIS Doris SMITH G FERGUSON Loretta PITKIN Marcia BYRD Lorraine HOWARD Robin WILLIAMS Artrice Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) GIBBS Faith GILLES Sherlyne Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to collaborate motivate educate and celebrate young 21st century innovative thinkers.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Mott Hall IV is a middle school that serves students in grades 6-8. We are co-located on campus K271 with two other schools. Our partnerships with various community based organizations allows us to provide our scholars with engaging learning experiences, a variety of extra curricular activities and supports our initiative to educate the whole child. These partnerships include: Eagle Academy Foundation Sports and Arts Foundation Beacon Musical Theatre International Broadway Jr Exceptional Learning Results LERU Billion Oysters Urban Advantage CHAMPS PSAL - Lacrosse Girls Empire Imagine It! What About The Children The Inner You Project In addition to these noted initiatives, we are confident that our continued partnership with UnCommon Schools Eagle Institute and CAMBA during the 2018-2019 school year will aid in transforming teaching learning and our overall school culture. Accomplishments 0  Our continued focus on improving teaching and learning has been very successful and has resulted in making great strides in closing the achievement gap. According to the 2016-2017 Middle School Quality Snapshot, our students are exceeding the established targets for all students making progress in ELA and exceeding the established targets for students in our lowest third and Students with Special Needs in ELA and Math. Additionally, our school has been successful in managing capital resources and obtaining grants to support the educational experiences that our students receive. We have obtained over $450,000 in grants to incorporate theatre arts into our curriculum and enhance our STEM program. We have also received grants like Learn to Grow and Bike to School that supports our initiative to educate the whole child. These grants and our unique partnerships are vital in creating learning experiences that equip our scholars with the knowledge, skills and social-emotional support that they will need to be successful throughout their time here, high school, college and beyond. Challenges Though we have made great strides in closing the achievement gap and our students are progressing academically, we still face the challenge of improving the level of proficiency for all of students on the NYS ELA and Math exams. Additionally, our attendance rate hovered around 92% and we must continue to work on improving that percentage. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our students represent a variety of special populations that includes Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners. - Students with disabilities form 56% of our student population - throughout SY 2018-2019 we will ensure all our SWDs are provided extra reading and content-specific support - ENLs - throughout SY 2018-2019 our ENLs will be given additional interventions and support through the use of the Pearson ILit program, a highly engaging suite of digital and blended literacy solutions as well as push-in/pull-out instruction from a certified ENL teacher - Males form 54% of our population - throughout SY 2018-2019 the Eagle Academy Foundation and the Inner You Project will be providing professional development training to teachers, and hands-on implementation support of promising practices to our young men to reverse the negative educational outcomes for our inner city young men 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Our comprehensive analysis reveals that we have made great strides across various elements of the Framework for Great Schools. Specifically, in the element of Rigorous Instruction and Collaborative Teachers. Careful attention was given to revising our literacy program aimed at increasing student reading levels through targeted instruction and to allowing additional time for our students to engage in extended independent reading. A monthly literacy reading focus strategy was created and implemented across disciplines and students were assessed on mastery toward each strategy. A professional development plan was created that provided all teachers with professional development around the monthly strategy and how to effectively teach students on how to utilize and apply the skill. Additional time was built into our master schedule for teachers to meet in grade level and content area teams to engage in collaborative conversations about best practices and data analysis. We’ve also made strides in Effective School Leadership. The strides that we have made in these elements are evidenced in our ability to close the achievement gap and in our 2016-2017 Quality Review and Principal Performance Observation ratings. 1  Though we have made strides in the above noted elements, we continue to identify and work on improving areas of focus. Two elements that we continue to strive to improve are Strong Family-Community Ties and Supportive Environment. Although we had great success with our SLT this year, we struggled to maintain a functioning Parent Teacher Association and attendance at our parent events fell short of our intended targets. Additionally, our student attendance also fell short of our intended target. We are confident that with an improved focus on these two elements, we will meet our targets for the upcoming year. We have analyzed the teacher/student performance data and evaluated the actions, strategies and activities that addressed last year’s goal and either refined the systems that were effective and/or added new systems. Refining of the systems/structures included but are not limited to: - enhancing our literacy focus and use of iReady - enhancing our science curriculum by integrating the use of Smart Science, A+STEM, Z Space, Sustainability, NYU RET and Urban Advantage - continuation of our professional development and parent communication cycle - modifying our units of study to ensure that they are rigorous and are aligned with the NGS and demands of the NYS ELA and math exams - integrating technology across all content areas - focus on data-driven instruction - enhancing the support that we provide to all stakeholders - restructuring our academic intervention services to include, After-school math and ELA supports that starts in September, and a Saturday Test Prep Academy alongside the SHSAT program 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 23K522 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 160 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 20 20 10 11 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 22 21 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 89.0% % Attendance Rate 86.9% % Reduced Lunch 1.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 12.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.17 0% 21% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 26.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 11 11 90.7% 2.5% 38.1% 85.6% 1.3% 0.6% 2 64% 5.6 9.2% 30% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: According to our comprehensive needs assessment and feedback from our 2016-2017 Quality Review Report: - School leaders use a systematic plan to provide teachers access to pedagogical support, materials and training aligned to NGS curricula and instructional shifts for individuals and subgroups of students to ensure rigor. Tasks are refined based on the results of student work. - Across classrooms teachers monitor and adjust curricula to support the NGS instructional shifts and NYS content standards. Teachers ensure that higher order thinking skills are consistently present by providing multiple entry points for all groups of students across core content areas and grades and faculty ensure that curricula are aligned to the NGS and emphasize the instructional shifts. - Across a vast majority of classrooms, teachers provide frequent and meaningful feedback to students based on the analysis of timely data. Students apply feedback so that they can reflect upon and assess their own progress. - The school leader and community make it a school-wide priority for all students and their families to be aware of school-wide expectations that are connected to a path to college and career readiness. The school provides a culture for learning that consistently communicates high expectations for all students . - Teachers work collaboratively to develop unit and lesson plans that meet the demands of NGS and grade level 4  data-driven protocols, address student achievement in all grades and subject areas. Weaknesses: According to our comprehensive needs assessment and self-analysis: - We must refine our units of study to ensure an interdisciplinary curricula that targets the arts, technology and other enrichment opportunities. Additionally, we will work to incorporate technology into our curriculum across subject areas to heighten student engagement and promote critical thinking skills. Improving the quality of our curriculum and units of study will serve to increase the current performance levels of our students on the NYS ELA and Math exams. Currently only 12% of our students are proficient in ELA and only 4% of our students are proficient in math. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will align our interdisciplinary units of study to the NGS in ELA, math, science and social studies with 100% accuracy and deliver a curriculum that is adaptable to the needs of all students - Gen Ed, ENLs and SpEd students - resulting in a minimum of 5% growth across benchmarks, and core subject assessments. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Research-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change: - Professional development will be provided to all teachers creating units of study on using the Rigorous Curriculum Design (RCD) Framework to create units of study that are rigorous, interdisciplinary, and integrate art, technology and enrichment activities. Through our professional development we will continue to maintain a normed understanding of rigor as defined by the standards and learn strategies to improve lesson and unit planning that are interdisciplinary, integrate the arts, technology and enrichment activities. Administrators and lead teachers will provide professional development. - Schedules will be modified to allow teachers to meet weekly in interdisciplinary teams to modify their units of study and discuss best practices. - Instructional Team (teachers and school leaders) will meet twice a month to discuss the quality of the units of study, assist in modifying the units of study, create common assessments and rubrics, ensure vertical and horizontal alignments across the grades and to identify instructional resources/materials designed to strengthen the curriculum and enrich learning experiences (the Instructional Team will be paid per session for meetings that occur after normal school hours) - Supplemental instructional material that support the integration of arts, technology and enrichment activities such as Smart Science, I-Ready and MyOn will be used to support successful implementation of the units and lessons. - Teacher teams will meet weekly during common planning times to modify the units of study and plan lessons to ensure all noted elements are present and to share best practices. Teacher teams will meet at least 3 times a week. - Administrators will engage in frequent cycles of observation and provide feedback to ensure that instruction is aligned with the units of study and that the new curriculum resources are Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All staff members and all students June 2018 – June 2019 Sept 2018-June 2019 - Professional development will be provided to teachers by school leaders, and lead teachers. - Instructional Team (teachers and school leaders) will meet twice a month to analyze units of study. - School leaders will purchase supplemental material to support successful implementation of unit and lesson plans. - Teacher teams will meet weekly during common planning times to modify units of study and lesson plans. - Administrators and instructional leads will analyze and select curriculum that include instructional supports to meet the needs of subgroups 6 - Administrators and instructional leads will facilitate professional development sessions - Teacher teams will meet weekly during common planning times to modify units of study and lesson plans being utilized effectively. - Teachers and administrators will engage in monthly cycles of gap analysis, analyzing student work products to determine if the improved curriculum and units of study are positively impacting student performance Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH): - Resources that support meeting the needs of students with disabilities, English Language Learners and other high-need student subgroups will be incorporated into unit and lesson plans, as well as daily instructional practices. - All teachers will be provided with the Individual Educational Plans of students that they service. These teachers will also participate in monthly professional development sessions and grade meetings to increase their knowledge of resources and strategies that are available to meet the needs of these subgroups. - Students will be flexibly grouped based on data to receive instruction that meets their individualized needs Administrators and teachers English Language Learners, students with disabilities and Level 1 students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Engaging families and supporting their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the NGS in order to support their children at home: - From August-2018-June 2019 During Parent Association meetings, we will provide parents with NGS workshops to explain how they are intertwined within the curriculum and explain how they can support us at home. 7  - Teachers will provide content specific workshops on the curriculum and how parents can best support students at home by providing resources - The Parental Communication Cycle developed to enhance collaboration between home and school will be implemented. The cycle includes phone calls, family workshops, conferences and other activities throughout the year - Parent curriculum letters will be sent home monthly across all grades and subjects - Progress reports will be sent home every 6 weeks - Family curriculum night will be held twice a year Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Title I and School-wide Project funds will also be used to pay for 6 teachers and 1 administrator on the instructional team for 2 hours for 20 weeks to analyze and modify the units of study to ensure that units are rigorous, interdisciplinary, and integrate art, technology and enrichment activities and to pay the instructional team per session when the professional development takes place after school hours. - Title I School-wide Project funds will be utilized to renew subscription for supplemental instructional materials such as I-Ready, to support successful implementation of the new units. - School schedule will strategically allow time for teachers to meet at least once a week in for content-area planning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. - By February 2019 all subject areas should have 6 units of studies that have been modified to meet the identified criteria - Analysis of the revised units of study will be done monthly for quality assurance - Classroom observations, feedback meetings and associated ADVANCE ratings will be done frequently throughout each month Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Administrators will use an-end-of-unit assessment across the subject areas to assess if objectives were met. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths: According to our comprehensive needs assessment and feedback from our 2017-2018 Quality Review Report: - School leaders consistently communicate high expectations to the entire staff and provide training and accountability systems linked to the attainment of the expectations. Families receive ongoing feedback from teachers to further their understanding of student progress towards expectations set for them. As a result, professional development supports teachers in meeting school leaders’ high expectations and parents are supported in understanding student progress through various modes of communication. Weaknesses: According to our comprehensive needs assessment and feedback from our Framework for Great Schools Report, there are concerns with classroom behaviors and positive peer interactions. These concerns impacted our overall score under the Supportive Environment element of the framework. According to the Learning Environment Survey, only 69% percent of our scholars agreed with the statement “most students behave properly when the teacher is not looking.” We must work to strengthen the structures that provide social-emotional support to our students to reduce the number of negative peer interactions and compliance to school rules.. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, a safe and restorative environment will be created by the introduction of various SEL activities and as evident by the 20% reduction of infractions and incidents in OORS. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change: - We will continue to work on improving safety at our school. Ongoing professional development in Positive Behavior Interventions and Support will be provided for the dean, guidance counselor and teachers on building school culture, promoting positive behaviors, managing student behaviors and establishing a culture for learning provided by administrators and lead teachers. - Teachers will incorporate the school’s “core values” and premise of our new school song into their classroom culture - The behavior team will meet weekly to analyze student incident data, identify trends and devise a plan of action to address chronic behavior problems. - The Excel Bucks program will be implemented to inspire and reward positive behaviors. - We will offer Extra Curricula after school clubs facilitated by school staff to serve as additional advisory for students and an opportunity to strengthen staff/student relationships. - Administrators and the dean will conduct monthly “culture walks” to ensure implementation of school-wide systems and structures and provide feedback for improvement. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH): - Our MHIV GEEKS (Guys/Girls Empowered by Excellence, Knowledge and Support) supports and inspires our most Sept 2018 – June 2019 Students with disabilities, English Language Learners and 0 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Students and Staff Members Sept 2018– June 2019 - All staff members will receive training in Positive Behavior Interventions and Support - All staff members will promote and reward positive behaviors through our Great Bucks program. - The Extra Curricula after school clubs will be supported by a school leader and 5 teachers. - The MHIV GEEKS(Guys/Girls Empowered by Education, Knowledge and Support) will be challenging students (including students with disabilities, ELLs, and other high-need subgroups) in achieving personal and academic greatness. other high-need student subgroups facilitated by the dean and the guidance counselor. - Our Excel Bucks program enables all students to earn points by exhibiting positive behavior or making a contribution to the school community. Engaging families and expanding their understanding of a supportive environment in order to support their children at home: - All parents participate in the Excel Bucks program. Parents can receive Excel Bucks and are recognized for their outstanding contributions to the school community as well for partnering with us on their child’s educational journey during monthly assembly programs. Sept 2018 – June 2019 All parents, principal and the parent coordinator - The parent coordinator, PTA and assistant principal will collaborate on parent Excel Buck incentives and recognition programs. - Principal conducts monthly Sip-n-Say with the parents. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. August 2018-June 2019 administration along with guidance and the parent coordinator will plan, oversee and monitor all family engagement workshops, goal-setting, decision making and other meaningful activities to keep the school and families committed to students learning and their overall social and emotional development. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Title I funds will be used to pay consultants that provide professional development workshops on building school culture, promoting positive behaviors, managing student behaviors and establishing a culture for learning. 2. Title I funds will be used to pay for student admissions for 4 educational reward trips throughout the year. 3. Title I funds will be used to pay 5 teachers and 1 administrator per session for the Extra Curricula After School program that will run from October 2018-May 2019 on Fridays from 2:30-4:30 for 30 sessions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1  1. Improvement in school safety will be measured by a decrease in the number of Level 3-5 incidents recorded in Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS). By February 2019, we should see a 10% or greater decrease to be on target for meeting our goal. 2. Effectiveness of the Excel Bucks program will be measured by student feedback and student responses on the Learning Environment Survey and Mock Learning Environment Survey. 3. Effectiveness of the after school clubs will be measured by student feedback, a decrease in the number of Level 3-5 incidents recorded in the On-line Occurrence Reporting System and results of the Learning Environment Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The VADIR report will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: According to our comprehensive needs assessment and feedback from our 2015-2016 Quality Review Report: - School leaders develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products . In some classrooms teachers used high-order questioning to engage students in high-level discussions. Additionally, the school wide instructional focus of providing multiple entry access to students was observed in an eighth grade science class. Students were grouped by assessed DOK competency level. Weaknesses: According to our comprehensive needs assessment and feedback from our 2016-2017 Quality Review Report: - Although across classrooms, teaching practices are aligned to the curricula and the Danielson Framework, reflecting the school’s articulated beliefs about how students learn best and teaching strategies provide multiple entry points and promote higher-order thinking skills for students, these practices are not yet apparent in a few classrooms. We must continue to strive to ensure that teacher pedagogy is consistent across all classrooms and that all students have multiple entry points to lessons and are prompted to think critically. Improving teacher pedagogy should result in an improvement in our students’ performance on the NYS ELA and math exams. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 teachers will receive three consecutive PDs and be able to work collaboratively on how to formulate questions to build depth and complexity (as will be evident in their Danielson 3b rating), and how to use data to inform instruction (evidenced in Danielson 3d rating) and students' ability to formulate questions in turn-and-talk activities.. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All staff members Sept 2018 – June 2019 Research-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change: - School leaders will develop a school-wide professional development plan. Professional development will be provided to all teachers on Danielson Framework for Teaching and the effective research based strategies of Doug Lemov’s Teach Like a Champion 2.0. Through professional development we will continue to develop a normed understanding of effective teaching practices. Professional development will be provided by school leaders, lead teachers and UnCommon Schools. - Teachers will be provided with frequent feedback from school leaders towards the improvement of instructional practices. We will use the instructional rounds model to develop strong teacher practice and coherence throughout the school. - All staff members will engage in Initial Planning Conferences and develop professional goals. Teachers will meet with school leaders informally during the year to discuss progress towards professional goals. Formal benchmark meetings with school leaders will be held mid-year and at the end of year. - Administrators will engage in frequent cycles of observation and provide feedback to ensure that instruction is aligned with the units of study and that the new curriculum resources are being utilized effectively. - Teachers and administrators will engage in monthly cycles of gap analysis, analyzing student work products to determine if the improved curriculum and units of study are positively impacting student performance - School leaders will develop a school-wide professional development plan. Professional development workshops for teachers and administrators will be facilitated by school leaders, lead teachers and UnCommon Schools. - School leaders will partner with Uncommon Schools to plan and facilitate professional development sessions. - School leaders will provide feedback at least six times to all classroom teachers after formal or informal observations. - School leaders will conference with teachers at the beginning, middle and end of the year to discuss growth. 4 Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH): - Teachers of students within these subgroups will receive additional professional development sessions to increase their capacity to meet the needs of these students. Students with disabilities, English Language Learners and other high-need student subgroups Sept 2018 – June 2019 - Professional development workshops for teachers and administrators will be facilitated by school leaders and lead teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to monthly meetings and workshops designed to increase their knowledge of their child’s academic and social performance and provide them with strategies to support their child’s growth at home. Sept 2018 – June 2019 Monthly meetings and workshops will be facilitated by school leaders, Single Shepherds, parent coordinator and teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Title I Priority/Focus and School-wide Project funds will be used to pay for consultants (Teaching Matters) to provide professional development and support in improving teaching practices. These funds will also be used for teacher per session (approximately 200 hours) when professional development takes place after normal school hours. Monday Professional Development times and grade meetings will also be used to conduct professional development sessions. 2. School leaders will meet with teachers during administrative periods to provide feedback. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 5  - By February 2019, 90% of teachers should be rated Effective or higher in domains 1e and 3c on half of the observations that have been conducted. - Teacher feedback from professional development sessions will be required and also the implementing of strategies provided during the workshops will be monitored by administration. - Professional development feedback forms will show evidence of effectiveness of PD sessions, calibrated ratings, patterns and trends that result from the professional development sessions. - Teacher self-reflections and progress logs (mid and end of year) will show evidence of growth toward meeting their goals. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance reports will be used to asses progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: According to our comprehensive needs assessment and feedback from our 2017-2018 Quality Review Report: - Curricula-aligned assessments and rubrics provide actionable feedback to students and teachers. Common assessments are used by teachers to make instructional and curricular modifications and monitor students’ progress toward goals. Weaknesses: - In order to continue to strengthen teacher pedagogy, build consistency across classrooms and improve academic performance, school leaders must continue to implement systems and structures to expand the use of best practices for assessment strategies across classrooms, including on-going checks for understanding and self-assessment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, a minimum of five professional learning sessions through CITE, will provide administrators and teachers with the tools needed to strengthen feedback techniques so that feedback be concrete specific and useful as a general school practice and will be evident in the administrators' observation feedback to teachers, and teachers response to student tasks. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change: - School leaders will create a 4-week professional development cycle designed to engage teachers in common planning, instructional rounds, gap analysis and targeted professional development sessions. - School leaders will strengthen the capacity of the instructional team by engaging them in professional development sessions designed to aid them in building teacher capacity across all classrooms. - School leaders will extend weekly cabinet meetings to include members of the instructional team. - Teacher leaders will facilitate professional development sessions. - School leaders will hire a lead teacher to support building capacity and consistency across all classrooms. - Adminsitrators will engage in frequent cycles of observation and provide feedback to ensure that instruction is aligned with the units of study and that the new curriculum resources are being utilized effectively. - Teachers and administrators will engage in monthly cycles of gap analysis, analyzing student work products to determine if the improved curriculum and units of study are positively impacting student performance -Teachers and administrators will conduct an in depth analysis of the BOY ELA and MOY assessment results to inform instructional decisions and monitor progress. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH): - Instructional leads will serve as “critical friends” and provide additional classroom support for all teachers who have students within these subgroups. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept 2018 – June 2019 Students with disabilities, English Language Learners and other high-need student subgroups Students with disabilities, English Language Learners and other high-need student subgroups Lead teachers, students with disabilities, English Language Learners and other high-- Instructional leads and lead teachers will participate in professional development sessions facilitated by school leaders and external provider. - Lead teacher will support school-wide initiatives to build capacity and consistency across all classrooms. Administrators Sept 2018 – June 2019 Lead teachers - Instructional leads will serve as “critical friends” and provide additional support to teachers. - Instructional leads will provide 8  - Select students in these subgroups will be provided with intensive support via small group instruction by an instructional lead. need student subgroups intensive support to small groups of students via a pullout program. - Lead teacher will meet monthly with teachers of students in these subgroups and conduct gap analysis on student work products. N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A -N/A N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Strategies to promote teacher-parent collaborations to improve student achievement: - Parents will be invited to monthly meetings (Sept 2018 – June 2019) and workshops designed to increase their knowledge of their child’s academic and social performance and provide them with strategies to support their child’s growth at home. - Monthly meetings and workshops will be facilitated by school leaders, Single Shepherds, teachers and parent coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - School schedule will strategically allow time for instructional leads to meet with their identified teachers to co-plan, co-teach, model or provided feedback at least 2 times a week. - Title I Priority/Focus and School-wide Project funds will be used to purchase supplemental instructional material such as Achieve 3000, READY, Smart Science, and iReady needed to support improving student performance. - Title I Priority/Focus and School-wide Project funds will be used to pay 6 teachers and 1 administrator to support our Saturday school program that will operate 8 Saturdays in February and March for 4 hours each day. - Title I Priority/Focus and School-wide Project funds will be used to purchase educational literature such as Driven by Data, Teach Like a Champion and Educational Leadership to aid enhancing the knowledge and building the capacity of our instructional leads. 9  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. -Teacher and Instructional team feedback from professional development sessions will indicate greater comfort and application when planning and implementing lessons using provided during workshops and peer mentors. Additionally, there should be evidence of the improvement of the quality of teaching practices as evidenced by teacher lesson plans and the associated ratings in Advance. - By February 2019 at least 65% of students should increase one level or more on the MOY ELA Benchmark assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Midyear student assessment reports will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to our comprehensive needs assessment and feedback from our 2017-2018 Quality Review Report: Strengths: - Families receive ongoing feedback from teachers to further their understanding of student progress towards expectations set for them. Weaknesses: - In an effort to increase parental engagement and strengthen the relationship between home and school, the school should continue to collaborate with the Parent Association, School Leadership Team and the parent coordinator to organize workshops and information sessions, develop systems to monitor effectiveness of parent workshops, and develop a system to track feedback from school community to inform decisions regarding family and community involvement to ensure positive impacts on students, families, and student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parents will have access to a minimum of 10 workshops and student-orchestrated school events designed to build their capacity to support their child’s academic and socio-emotional growth and evidenced by the parent participation points data. 1 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept 2018 – June 2019 All parents, staff, school leaders and the parent coordinator - School leaders, parent coordinator, teachers and consultants will conduct parent workshops. - School leaders, teachers, support staff and the parent coordinator will be responsible for improving and ensuring ongoing communication with our parents. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change: - To support parental capacity to support children’s academic growth monthly parent meetings will be hosted for parents to discuss concerns and academic progress with their child’s teachers. - Monthly Coffee with the Principal meetings will also be held for parents to meet with the principal to discuss any concerns and find out ways to support their child’s growth at home. - Monthly parent workshops on topics that include the New Generation Learning Standards and test preparation, PTA meetings and events such as Academic Night and our Multi-cultural Festival designed to increase parental engagement will also be held throughout the year. - To improve communication between home and school, we will distribute the School/Home Connection Monthly Newsletter, create a school website via E-Chalk and use school messenger to keep parents informed of student attendance and school events/initiatives. We will also promote the use NY Schools Account site to keep parents informed of student data and keep them abreast of their child’s current performance via phone contact and progress logs. - Parental Communication Cycle developed to enhance collaboration between home and school will be implemented. The cycle includes phone calls, family workshops, conferences and other activities throughout the year. - Mock surveys will be sent home twice a year to get feedback on our effectiveness. - An administrator will attend each event to observe and provide feedback. 2 Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH): - The guidance counselor, social worker and instructional needs will work throughout the year to provide academic and socio-emotional support to students and families of students in these subgroups. Students with disabilities, English Language Learners and other high-need student subgroups Sept 2018 – June 2019 Strategies to promote stronger family and community ties and to increase parent involvement in support of improved student outcomes: All parents Sept 2018 – June 2019 - Parents will be invited to monthly meetings and workshops designed to increase their knowledge of their child’s academic and social performance and provided them with strategies to support their child’s growth at home. The guidance counselor, social worker and instructional needs will work throughout the year to provide academic and socio- emotional support to students and families of students in these subgroups. - School leaders, teachers and consultants will conduct the monthly workshops. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Sports and Arts Beacon Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Title I Priority/Focus funds will be used for consultants to conduct 10 workshops during October to June period designed to improve parental involvement/engagement. Topics will include but not be limited to Understanding the Common Core Learning Standards, Supporting Your Child’s Education, Understanding Student Progress and Building Home/School Relationships. The funds will also be used to fund activities/events designed to promote parental involvement and engagement. Funds will also be utilized for supplemental materials to support creating a welcoming and positive school climate, fostering communication and encouraging parental involvement that successfully prepares students for the next level. - Title I Priority/Focus funds will be used to pay for the school’s messenger, E-Chalk, website, and School/Home Connection subscription purchased to improve communication with parents. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 3  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. - Effectiveness of the workshops and meetings will be evidenced by positive feedback distributed after the workshops and from the Learning Environment Survey. - Effectiveness of communication methods will be evidenced by parental response on the associated area of the Learning Environment Survey. - By February 2019, at least 5 parent workshops and/or school-wide events should be hosted. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent logs, event sign in sheets and parent surveys will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) A comprehensive Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.)  Balanced literacy Varies depending on During the school data analysis is done  Workshop model when the service is day to determine if a  Strategies for being provided  After School student is in need of Writers AIS services. In  4 square writing addition all students  Achieve 3000 who scored a Level 1  Interventions that on the NYS ELA exam accompany the receives AIS services core curriculum Wednesday and Thursday from 2:30-4:30pm Mathematics A comprehensive  iReady  Workshop model Varies depending on During the school data analysis is done  Interventions that when the service is day to determine if a accompany the being provided  After School student is in need of core curriculum  iReady AIS services. In addition all students who scored a Level 1 on the NYS math Wednesday and Thursday from 2:30-4:30pm 5  exam receives AIS services A comprehensive Science  Balanced literacy Varies depending on During the school data analysis is done  Workshop model when the service is day to determine if a  Interventions that being provided  After School student is in need of accompany the AIS services Social Studies A comprehensive core curriculum - Smart Science Balanced literacy Varies depending on Wednesday and Thursday from 2:30-4:30pm  During the school data analysis is done  Workshop model when the service is day to determine if a  Interventions that being provided  After School student is in need of accompany the AIS services core curriculum At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teachers identify  At risk counseling Small group and individual students who are in  Positive Behavior need of at-risk and Intervention services and submit System their names to the Wednesday and Thursday from 2:30-4:30pm  During the school day PPT Team for a comprehensive data review. The Pupil Personnel Team makes the final determination. 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 7 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students and families in temporary housing receive special support from our guidance counselor, Single Shepherds, parent coordinator and pupil secretary. These services include but are not limited to Metrocards, free trip admissions, counseling, referral to outside services and uniform assistance. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In order to recruit teachers we work closely with our Borough Field Center HR Director, traditional teacher education programs, and alternative licensure programs. We have attended hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly qualified teachers. We work closely with our HR Director to ensure that all required documentation and assessment deadlines are met. In our efforts to retain highly qualified teachers and ensure they have the supports and strategies to grow professional we are highly invested in professional development. We offer professional development to teachers on current topics provided by other teachers, administrators, lead teachers and outside consultants. Mentoring is implemented as per teacher requirements. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We believe in individualized differentiated professional development plans that are designed to focus on each teacher’s, paraprofessionals, and administrator’s needs. Each staff member is an active participant in the process and collaborates with the administration and network to look at, monitor and track their development, mainly through the observation process which utilizes Danielson Framework for Teachers, as well as through student practice and work products. Staff members self-assess on a regular basis and confer with school leaders as it relates to individual professional development needs. All professional development provided is research and evidence based. Research based strategies (RBI’s) are emphasized in our trainings, and via the mini and formal observation process. Inter-visitations are encouraged for all teachers as well as participation in external professional development opportunities. Our network specialists support teacher retention by providing on-site trainings, modeling, and teacher team development. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 9  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The MOSL committee in consultation with teachers decide on what assessments will be used for teacher impact on student learning. The principal then approves this decision. Administration in consultation with teachers and the instructional core team decide of in-house assessments that will be used to measure student learning. Teachers receive training throughout the year on administering these assessments, analyzing the results and devising action plans to address gaps in student learning. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. 0  school allocation amounts) Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 127,298 Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal 0 0 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 1,256,708 x x Column B Section Reference(s) Sec 5a, Part 3 Sec 5b, Part 3 Sec 5c, Part 3 Sec 5d, Part 3 Sec 5e, Part 3 Sec 5a, Part 3 Sec 5b, Part 3 Sec 5c, Part 3 Sec 5d, Part 3 Sec 5e, Part 3 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 1  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Mott Hall IV Middle School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Mott Hall IV Middle School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 3  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 4  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Mott Hall IV Middle School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 5  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial gender and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 6  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 7  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 8  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 23 School Name Mott Hall IV Middle School Borough Brooklyn School Number 522 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Marica Forrester Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher N/A Teacher/Subject Area R. Bromley/Sp. Ed. Teacher/Subject Area J. Meade/Sp.Ed. Related-Service Provider Michael Pappas Superintendent Miatheresa Pate Assistant Principal Caroline Daly Coach N/A School Counselor Kenneth Springer Parent N/A Parent Coordinator Latitia Jackson Field Support Center Staff Member Nigel Powell Other (Name and Title) NA C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 177 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 4 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 2.26% 0  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 NA 3 NA 4 NA 2 NA K NA NA NA NA NA NA NA Lang. NA NA NA NA NA NA Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 NA 6 NA 7 NA 8 NA 9 NA 10 NA 11 NA 12 NA 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use F & P to assess the early literacy skills of our ELL students. Our BOY F&P results administered in Sept/Oct revealed that all of our ELL students are reading at below grade level. We discovered that 2 students have mastered decoding skills and are fluent readers. While one is a non- reader and struggles to identify sight words, decode and comprehend. We have used this data to determine what intervention programs will be utilized to improve the reading levels. IReady Language Program will be utilized with students who have been identified as having decoding deficiencies will be utilized with the students who need to improve their comprehension skills in order to master targeted CCLS standards. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? F and P 1  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We constantly monitor the progress of our ELL students through rigorous assessment in all subject areas. During our teacher team meetings, teachers have the time to go over data and plan instruction collaborative to ensure the academic success of our ELL students Teacher observation notes are reviewed as well as formal and informal class assessments. All content area teachers give a brief report about the ELL students' strengths and weaknesses in that particular class. The goal is to work collaborative to support their learning. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Academic Intervention and Saturday Academy 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Two of our ELL students remained at the Advanced and Intermediate levels respectively. One did poorly and moved from Intermediate to Beginning level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Academic Intervention Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. a. Since our 3 are in different grades, the ENL teacher offers a pull out service. Our ELLs at the present time have IEPs, the ENL teacher pays attention to their individual academic needs. Our program is designed to make it easier to provide the mandated service hours to all eligible students, and to ensure that our students get the maximum support available to them. They follow the program set for their assigned classes, with weekly instructional periods that meet all NY City and State regulations in ELA, math, science, social studies, foreign language, PE, and the arts. Major subject area teaching periods range from five to ten periods per week. The ENL mandates are integrated into their core curriculum. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2  Instruction is provided entirely in English. A part-time ENL specialist provides pullout services three days per week, according to the number of minutes mandated by students' proficiency levels as indicated by their most recent NYSESLAT scores. In addition, to the 50 minute of academic intervention from an assigned teacher, our ELL student receives pull-out instructional time, and occasional push-in instructional time. Students are pulled out for either individual and/or small group instruction, in order to meet the mandated minutes of ENL instruction for their proficiency level as determined on their most recent NYSESLAT. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. State recommended CCLS programs were chosen and are being utlilized for our ELA and Math Core curriculum. For ELA, teachers use HMD Literature that includes Adaptive Readers for ELLs and Go Math is used for math. All programs are research based, rigorous, designed to meet the demands of the CCLS and include support for ELLs. Teachers meet weekly to modify units of study to ensure additional instructional supports are included to meet the needs of ELLs and other subgroups. Instruction is differentiated for all subgroups to allow all learners access to the curriculum. English Language acquisition is emphasized in the content areas using a balanced literacy approach with visuals and real life connection. Language functions and strategies are taught within the content of the lesson. The instructional components are based on the NY State ENL standards. Additionally, content area instruction science, social studies, and math, are conducted, using ENL methodology, in which all teachers receive training. Specialized materials, such as the computer and electronic devices are also used to support student learning. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? N/A 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. We don’t currently have any SIFE students but our plan for SIFE students begins with the identification and screening of students who enter as new entrants to the NYC Public School System (code 58’s) with a HLIS and a complete review of the NYSITELL. We identify students who are at least two years below expected grade level and have some basic literacy skills in their native language, or who have no skills in their native language. Feedback is also requested from the classroom teacher and parent to help plan for instuction for our students. At present we have no SIFE students. However, if we did have any our plan for these students would be to provide a differentiated program that would develop their core academic language and literacy skills English. Students will also practice English skills through the use of Imagine Learning English Technology reading program. The Imagine Learning program uses an ESL approach to learning. It can be used for whole class lessons, and for differentiated instruction. The goal of the program is to expose all ELL students including SIFE to strategies that accelerate their academic growth. Imagine Learning features school readiness, high frequency words, listening and speaking, phonemic awareness, emergent literacy, reading and writing, literary response and analysis. Automated reports detail student progress for teacher grouping and parent information can be translated into first language. Additionally, SIFE students are closely monitored in our school’s intervention academic programs such as extended day, after-school, and Saturday Academy. The program uses standard base instruction, NLA support, and interactive approaches such as library, and study groups. b. Our plan for Newcomers receiving services for (less than 3 years) is mainly to cluster all ELL students on the same grade in the same class for optimum academic performance. Students learn to interact, share experiences without peer pressure, and teachers can plan to meet students’ individual needs. Via the collaboration of the ESL push in teacher and the classroom 3  teacher our plan is to help students increase language development through technology and small group instruction, and pervasive vocabulary instruction. We try to make the learning environment as pleasant and comfortable as possible by assigning another classmate whenever possible who speaks their native language to assist in the transition process and with translation needs. In doing so, the students who are new to the country develop basic skills and the necessary language to cope with daily social and academic demands. Interim ELA test practice and test sophistication activities are also used to prepare students to meet CCLS standards. c. Our plan for (4 to 6 years) ELLs is the same as for our newcomers, with the addition of an intense immersion in reading and writing activities (depending on the area that they need improvement upon, as per their performance on the NTSESLAT. d. Our plan for long term ELLs (completed 6 years) is to involve them in Academic Intervention Services (AIS), such as our After school and 50 Minute Extended day programs, test sophistication sessions, counseling services, and in peer study groups. Daily journal writing and teacher directed writing projects will be included into the classroom instruction. We will offer testing modifications, extended time, small grouping, and class setting conducive to learning. e. Former Ells continue to receive instructional supports and academic intervention services until they no longer demonstrate a need that the services are required. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ENL and classroom teachers utilize curriculum supports and strategies included in our core programs in order to differentiate instruction to our ELLs. Additional programs have also been purchased to supplement our core curriculum in an advanced effort to meet their needs. Supplemental programs such as Myon, Wilson Reading and Achieve 3000 aid in differentiating instruction to our ELLs. Addtionally, learning and interest inventories are administered to these students and are incorporated into planning lessons that meet the needs of these learners. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ESL and classroom teachers utilize curriculum supports and strategies included in our core programs in order to differentiate instruction to our ELLs. Additonal programs have also been purchased to supplement our core curriculum in an advanced effort to meet their needs. Supplemental programs such as Myon, Imagine Learning, Wilson Reading and Achieve 3000 aid in differentiating instruction to our ELLs. Addtionally, learning and interest inventories are administered to these students and are incorporated into planning lessons that meet the needs of these learners. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We offer the following academic intervention services for all of our ELL students: Academic Intervention After School (T-W), RTI and Saturday Academy. Various research based programs are utilized with these programs to support the progress of our ELLs. These services are offered in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year we have a focus on integrating technology into our curriculum to heighten student engagement and allow ELLs mulitple entry points. The use of interactive Smartboards, laptops, smart repsonse systems, document cameras and software programs will allow classroom teachers and the ENL teachers to provide rigorous, engaging and targeted instruction to improve student performance. Also the professional development that our teachers will receive should aid in improving practices designed to meet the needs of these students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELL students are afforded equal access to any and all programs offered at our school. These programs include all extra curricula activities, such as After School Academic Program and Saturday Academy. Permission slips are distributed to all of our 4  students at the same time. When needed, permission slips for all programs are translated into the native language that the parents speak and they are asked to send them back whether permission is granted or not. When ELLs participate in any program, the teachers and club facilitators are made aware of who the ELL students are and are encouraged to employ strategies learned at various workshops to allow ELLs full access to the programs. Teachers/facilitors are encouraged to seek the assistance of administrators if they have difficulty meeting the needs of these students. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. This year we have a focus on integrating technology into our curriculum to heighten student engagement and allow ELLs mulitple entry points. The use of interactive Smartboards, laptops, smart repsonse systems, document cameras and software programs will allow classroom teachers and the ESL teachers to provide rigorous, engaging and targeted instruction to improve student performance. Additionally, Myon, Mathathletics and Achieve 3000 will be utilized to support the needs of these students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Because we have so few ELLs (actuallythree this year), and no newly arrived immigrant students, we do not offer programs specific to newly enrolled ELLs before the start of the school year. If our demographics change in the future, we will consider implementing such programs. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. MHIV is a middle school; all our programs, resources and supports are specific to this age group and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? This year we have a focus on integrating technology into our curriculum to heighten student engagement and allow ELLs mulitple entry points. The use of interactive Smartboards, laptops, smart repsonse systems, document cameras and software programs will allow classroom teachers and the ESL teachers to provide rigorous, engaging and targeted instruction to improve student performance. Additionally, Myon, Mathathletics and Achieve 3000 will be utilized to support the needs of these students. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). New Student/Parent workshops and orientations are held for every new student and parent. The Parent Coordinator works with the registrar and the principal to identify newly enrolled Ells so that the orientation can be scheduled. During the orientation, the principal, ESL teacher and Parent Coordinator meet with the parent and the student to get a clear sense of who they are, find out what their needs are and to acclimate them to the school community. When applicable new students are paired with a language buddy in their class or someone who is relatively close in age. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? English 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 5  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our certified part-time ENL specialist participates in district and city-wide professional development for ENL teachers. He consults with classroom teachers on how to meet the needs of ELLs in the content area, offering ideas for differentiation and language development support. Teachers of self-containted special education classes, which serve two of our ELLs, also participate in school-wide, district, and network PD for ELLs. Additionally, the NSL specialist will offer PD's to classroom teachers of our ELL student. Our certified part-time ENL specialist participates in district, regional, cluster, network, and city-wide professional development for ENL teachers. He consults with classroom teachers on how to meet the needs of ELLs in the content area, offering ideas for differentiation and language development support. Teachers of self-containted special education classes, which serve two of our ELLs, also participate in school-wide, district, and network PD for ELLs. Additionally, the NSL specialist will offer PD's to classroom teachers of our ELL student. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. When we have ELLs in the eighth grade, they receive support from our guidance counselor to help navigate the high school admission process, and to prepare for the transition to high school. Our ENL specialist also works with Grade 8 ELLs, making sure that they and their families understand how to use the high school directory, how to select high school choices, and how to correctly fill out their high school applications. The Parent Coordinator hosts a workshop specifically for ELLs' parents, and ENL teacher reviews the eighth grade ELLs' high school applications with them, before they are returned to the guidance counselor. Classroom teachers, our parent coordinator, community workers, and the office staff who work with our incoming 6th grade, are supported by our school administration in helping these students learn school routines and discipline. When a language other than English is indicated on the Home Language survey, and when parents have requested translated school communications, letters sent home by teachers are translated, either using DOE translation services, or by a staff member fluent in the language Professional development sessions are held weekly for all teaching staff, as well as on designated city-wide PD days, that include instructional differentation for ELL students. All school staff, including pedagogues, administrators, secretaries, guidance, community workers and parent coordinator are invited to participate in ENL professional development. Copies of all PD agendas and attendance are kept in the Principal's office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Annually, parents of ELLs are invited to meet with the LPT. At this meeting a teacher who is proficient in the parent's preferred language is present to translate the information. The student's academic and language development progress, English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas are discussed. School staff necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language development in all content areas in English will be present. A qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands will be there. Attendance is recorded and kept with student's permanent records. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 6  Parents are surveyed at the beginning of each year, during intake and at the initial PTA meetings, as to their interests and needs, to encourage them to participate, and to discuss ways they can be involved with their child's class and with the school community. ELL parents are invited to participate in our active PTA, which provides workshops for parents throughout the year. Recent topics have included: test preparation and accommodations; NY State learning standards; Common Core learning standards; graduation information; high school admissions information; summer learning opportunities; and parenting issues. We offer "Math Nights" and "Technology Nights" for parents to come to school and 'learn' what their children are learning. Our administrators, test coordinator, and parent coordinator communicate with parents regularly via Monthly newsletters to foster awareness of issues pertaining to students' academic and social development, and to share information about community events. Our parent coordinator communicates with parents on issues relating to school rules and procedures, such as the school uniform and scheduling. Our ENL specialist communicates regularly with ELL familes about ENL service eligibility, scheduling and testing information. When parents have requested translated communications, translation services are provided, usually by a staff member fluent in the language, or via DOE translation services. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 7 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Dellie M Edwards, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 8  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Mott Hall IV School DBN: 23K522 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Marica Forrester Title Principal Caroline Daly Assistant Principal Latitia Jackson Parent Coordinator N/A S. Myers ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Richard Bromley Teacher/Subject Area Jave Meade Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Kenneth Springer School Counselor Miatheresa Pate Michael Pappas N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other NA Other NA Other NA Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 11/16/17 11/16/17 11/16/17 11/16/17 11/16/17 11/16/17 11/16/17 NA N/A 11/16/17 11/16/17 11/16/17 N/A N/A N/A 9  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 23K522 School Name: Mott Hall IV Superintendent: M. Pate The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary)NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Mott Hall IV is a choice school located in the Ocean Hill section of Brooklyn with approximately 160 students. Three of our students are in the ENL program, Some of these students come from homes where their parents do not speak English, and are therefore unable to provide English language experiences that enhance classroom instruction and further second language development. Our admission team - secretary, parent coordinator, ENL specialist, guidance counselor and administrators - looks at the home language survey, the ATS printout of languages spoken by students, carries out holistic assessment through social interaction with the parents, and interviews with students and members of their families. A questionnaire is also sent to parents to find out their preferred language of communication with the school. Home language of our students is Spanish. Notices are translated into Spanish, and sent to parents. In addition, our school prides itself with having a diverse staff. Many 0  members of staff speak a variety of languages, and assist in translating all correspondence for the parents of our ENL students when the need arises. Our Parent Coordinator also uses the Translation and Interpretation Unit for notices, information on school calendars, newsletters and one-to-one over the phone interpretation services to schools. Our website offers various language preferences. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish English NA NA 0 0 NA NA 0 60 NA NA 100 60 NA NA 100 60 NA NA 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. NA Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Newsletters, school calendar, PTA Monthly NA Parent Handbook, July, Aug. Sept. (any time there is a new admit) Announcements, after school and trip permission slips, Approx. bi-weekly 1  curriculum letters and any additional school-home correspondence will be translated. NA NA NA Monthly NA NA NA NA NA NA 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Throughout the year, we will host PTA meetings, SLT meetings, progress meetings, parent workshops, open school day/night, curriculum night, school-wide events and CEC meetings that may require translation. NA NA NA Monthly Person and computer interpretation service(s)? NA NA NA NA NA NA 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Staff who speaks the language calls the parent. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Professional Learning Sessions Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will translate all important letters that go home to parents who require them. We will also access the Translation and Interpretation Unit services whenever we are unable to provide our own translators. We are cognizant of the need to have a speaker of the primary language of the parent at every IEP meeting, and other important meetings, and we do provide these services. Every parent who has indicated a primary language other than English has and will continue to receive a copy of the Bill of Parents Rights and Responsibilities in their primary languages. Our Safety Plan and our LAP provide for this Translation and Interpretation Service. Our Parent Coordinator makes an effort to contact every parent consistently to notifying parents in Spanish and French of continuous activities, services, meetings and workshops. Our school is one of three in the building. At the main entrance security desk, there are sign posted in different languages indicating that translation services are available through the DOE with the phone number of the translation unit. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will send out parent surveys twice a year to our ELL parents to determine how we can better meet their needs. 3 
