 17K546 School Name: HIGH SCHOOL FOR PUBLIC SERVICE: HEROES OF TOMORROW Principal: SEAN RICE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information High School for Public Service 17k546 331700011546 9-12: Secondary High School School Number (DBN): 600 Kingston Avenue Brooklyn, NY 11203 718-756-5325 Phone Number: 718-363-3206 Fax: Sean Rice srice@school.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: Sean Rice Jason Zanitsch Luke Delfeus Allan Martin Albert Medina Chandler Dupras-SGAPresident Reana Cummings-SGAVice President CBO Representative: NA District Information 17-Affinity Richard Cintron Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent: 335 Adams Street - Room 510 Brooklyn, NY 11201 rcintro@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: Phone Number: P. 718-923-5124 718-923-5145 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Affinity FSC: Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 313 Livingston Street-Room 606, Brooklyn, NY 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-9355618 Phone Number: 917-2879241 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Sean Rice Jason Zanitsch Albert Medina Lelia Headley ShermaBeko Chandler Dupras Reana Cummings AmrylAustin Anne Miller Maureen West *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Allan Martin Cynthia Muldrow Member/ UFT Teacher Member/ UFT Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of the High School for Public Service: Heroes of Tomorrow is to enable each student to develop the academic and social skills necessary to be an active participant in the community and society. Through community service and a project-based assessment philosophy, the school develops the 21st Century skills needed to prepare students for college and career. All students are required to complete a sequence of 4 mastery projects in each core course, incorporating student choice and real world problem solving. All students work with our community service   director to engage in direct partnership with local community organizations and residence to improve conditions for all. The key foundations of these 21st Century skills are collaboration, communication (both oral and written), creativity and innovation, critical thinking, and problem solving. These skills are developed through our medical and legal academies, a commitment to visual and performing arts, and partnership with community-based organizations. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our mission to perform change-based community service is visible in our programming, after school activities, as well as a graduation expectation. It can also be witnessed in the ongoing improvements in the physical community surrounding our school. Graduates of HSPS are equipped with an impressive resume of college-ready academic credentials, as well as noted experiences of community involvement. Students are encouraged to strive for excellence through rigorous course work, performance-based mastery tasks, and proof of community impact. Our strengths include a staff fully committed to volunteerism, individualized instruction, and th acquisition of 21st Century Skills. Our school has a low teacher turn over rate, low transfer rate, and low drop out rate as all stakeholders are invested in student achievement. Our programming permits our school to benefit from longer periods, surpassing the required 180 minutes per week of instructional requirements for each course. The majority of our classes meet for 200-260 minutes per week. Additional seat time enables our faculty to plan in-depth instruction. The HSPS advisory program allows our staff to make personal connections to all students, ultimately supporting the whole child. As a small school, challenges include the ability to offer an abundance of elective courses for advanced students who satisfy basic requirements, early in their secondary career. In addition, smaller cohorts are continuously challenged by the need to integrate 21 st Century Skills to meet the demands of all learning styles. Also, as a campus school, shared space presents physical and programmatic challenges for large space usage, such as the PE space, cafeteria, auditorium, and the outdoor space. Our school had significant achievements in the last school year. Our final attendance rate was 93.8%, a .5% improvement. Our final graduation rate for 2018was 96.4% (109/114). Once again, our 2017-2018 Framework for Great Schools Report results displayed improvements in 6 of 6 areas, Rigorous Instruction from 3.57 to 3.89 (+.32), Collaborative Teachers from 3.58 to 3.79 (+21), Supportive Environment from 3.39 to 3.50 (+.11), Effective School Leadership from 3.93 to 4.06 (+.13), Strong Family Ties from 2.75 to 4.01, and Trust from 3.53 to 4.03, respectively. Although we made marked improvements and exceeded both the borough-wide and city-wide averages in all 6 areas, we are dedicated to deepening the effectiveness of serving our community. Student achievement is evidenced by credit accumulation statistics, as reported by our School-wide scholarship report and New Vision's Student Sorter. Overall, pass rate for all grade/all courses was 91.73%. Respectively, the successful accumulation of 10+ credits per cohort was 9th at 92%, 10th at 89.05%, 11th at 90.47%, and 12th at 96%. Our overall graduation rate remained above our annual goal of 95% at 96.8% with over 35% of the cohort earning an Advanced Regents Diplomas. School culture and tone changes supported an increase in student engagement and progress towards college readiness. Our school program offered Advanced Placement courses in AP Literature, AP Language, 0  AP Biology, and AP U.S History. Advanced enrichment courses included Pre-Calculus, Calculus, Law, Medical Science, Public Speaking, Law and Literature, Ecology, Physics, Studio Art, Advanced Band and Chorus. Our active community partnerships included Peer Mediation, Kaplan PSAT Prep and Sophomore Skills program, and Kings Against Violence Initiative (KAVI), Global Kids, BuildOn, Generation Citizen, Arthur Ashe Institute for Urban Health, Elizabeth Arden College and Career Readiness Workshops, New York Cares Club, MCC Theater and New Yorkers Against Gun Voilence. Each of these CBO programs offers school-based after school programming for our students. In addition, 35 students were trained and received certificates in CPR and First Aid Care. Our school continued partnerships with LIU Honors and College Now for higher education opportunities. Our parent involvement and positive response rate to our school survey increased in 2017-2018. In September, we hosted a successful Curriculum Night where nearly 90% of all parents participated in at least one parent facing event. Our PA has made a tremendous impact on school tone and culture. PA members have organized events, such as Parent Health and Wellness Day, Family Financial Literacy Night, Family Movie Night, The Race to Advanced Regents Diplomas, Student/Family/Staff Sporting events, continuing education language programs, Parent Advocacy Workshops have all contributed to an increase in parent involvement, as well as parent knowledge of student tracking. Our progress is evidenced by the positive increase in Strong Family-Community Ties on our school survey from 2.75 to 4.01, the largest area of growth. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We continue to see an increase in our population for students with IEP designations, including students in self contained programs and with limited mobility. We continue to build a special education department with the capacity to serve students with high needs. The SE department has grown from 1 teacher and 2 paraprofessionals 5 years ago, to 6 SE teachers and 8 paraprofessionals. Our school now offers additional academic intervention services during lunch and after school, targeting students with the greatest academic needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. School has made improvements in Framework for Supportive Environment (Classroom Behavior, Social-Emotional, Peer Support for Academic Work) all surpassing the Borough and City-Wide marks. Our school has made noted improvements in specific regents pass rates, graduation rates, and college acceptances based on increased rigor in coursework. Our school made improvements in all 6 of the elements of the Frameworks for Great Schools, from 16/17 to 17/18, specifically Rigorous Instruction (+.32%), Supportive Environment (+.11%), Collaborative Teachers (+.21), Effective School Leadership (+.13%), and Strong Family Ties (+1.26%). This impacted the previous year's goal addressing the category representing our sole decrease for Collaborative Teachers (-1%). Our indicators in Strong Family-Community Ties displayed our largest area of growth with 1.26%. We will continue to focus on all areas of the Frameworks, for additional growth. Our focus will continue to be on all 6 elements, with concentrated efforts on continued growth in Community-Family Ties and Collaborative Teachers. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 17K546 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 454 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 6 6 5 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 30 28 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 80.0% % Attendance Rate 75.1% % Reduced Lunch 1.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 15.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.68 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 98% 92% 94.6% 24.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 31 30 1 93.5% 4.6% 13.7% 76.7% 4.4% 2.2% 2 52% 8.3 N/A N/A 93% 98% 96.3% 33% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In 2017-2018, our school received a Quality Review and our school leadership participated in 2 reflective PPO visits and the DOE School Survey program. School strengths continue to be identified in School Culture (1.4, 3.4), Systems for Improvement (1.3, 3.1,), and Instructional Core (1.1, 1.2, 1.3) where our rating was proficient or well developed. Areas of Improvement include Systems for Improvement (4.1, 4.2, 5.1)where our rating was developing. Our goal continues to strive for Well Developed feedback to drive increased student success. This includes a more effective process for teacher feedback, continued growth of student questioning and discussion, as well as increased parent involvement. Academically, our June 2018 Regents scores in mathematics identifies a continued need to increased rigor, academic intervention services, and a focus on professional development for math teachers. Our Growth Percentile in Algebra1 Regents was 3.8. The gap between our college readiness index in mathematics and ELA has grown to almost 35%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, raise our school's college readiness index in mathematics based in Algebra 1 regents by 5%. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Utilize professional development resources with our support organization at New Visions. The focus area will be integrating common core math literacy instructional methods for Algebra, Geometry, and Algebra 2. In 2018-2019, our mathematics teachers will adopt and utilize the full New Visions curriculum https://curriculum.newvisions.org/math. Our instruction program will follow the sequential units for Algebra 1, Geometry, and Algebra II, including unit plans, regents alignment activities, quiz banks, and assessment tasks. In 2018-2019, our entire math department will join the full year OFF SITE professional development series for mathematics instruction offer by New Visions for integration of NV curriculum. In 2018-2019, New Visions will partner with HSPS to provide on on-site math coach to support the roll out and use of the curriculum and develop curriculum revisions for students with disabilities. In the summer of 2018, HSPS will provide math teacher representative to attend a summer institute for curriculum development.     . Our school will support the addition of a Peer Collaborative teacher. The PCT will attend summer training and receive PCT certification to support instructional focus of the math department. The PCT will primarily focus on helping the math department develop curriculum and assessments that align with 21st Century skills. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? July 1, 2018-June 14, 2019 Principal, Math Department Chair, Math Teachers 9th, 10th, and 11th grade Algebra 1, Geometry, and Algebra II students. . . . July 1, 2018-June 14, 2019 Mathematics Department, PD team, Math Chair, Principal and Assistant Principal, Peer Collaborative Teacher Mathematics Department, Professional Development team, Math Department Chair, Principal and Assistant Principal, Peer 4 Devise a targeted, early intervention, and supplemental plan for tutoring, teacher co-planning, and regents prep programs that offers both our math teachers and students opportunities to impact positive change. Student with IEPs and English Language Learners will be offered targeted after school intervention services on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays. Sessions will be dedicated to specific content support, homework guidance, peer tutoring, and additional supports from paraprofessionals and licensed content teachers. ELL students will be provided with language materials, including NYSED produced regents glossaries, and side by side exams to prepare for state required assessments. Collaborative Teacher All mathematics students scheduled for a regents bound course September 5, 2018-June 14, 2019 Principal, Math Department Chair, Programming Staff, After-school staff, Peer Collaborative Teacher, paraprofessionals. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Incoming 9th graders will be assessed in mathematical areas during our summer bridge program. Students with math deficits will be identified and recommended for immediate support at the onset of the fall term. The results of the initial assessment, as well as AIS schedules will be shared with parents before school begins. Parents will be prompted to track their child's progress in real time using PupilPath. Students who enter our school with a math score under 2.0 will be scheduled for an afterschool AIS course, two days per week. Parents and students will be notified by September 30, 2018. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Programming consideration will be made to ensure common planning time for the math department. Mathematics department teachers will collaborate to explore the scope and sequence, students and teacher materials, on-line resources, and related curriculum materials from the Engage-NY Core Curriculum. Professional Development Time on Monday and Tuesday afternoons and C6 will be utilized to enhance the work of the staff. School data, New Visions Curriculum, Danielson Framework for Teaching will be sited as resources for planning and curriculum assessment. School budget will be dedicated to integrate a Peer Collaborative Teacher and Lead Teacher, as staff supports. Per session will be used to supplement work day time for completing the work, including teacher planning and additional student interventions during school breaks.. School google platform will be used to share all findings and work with school staff. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A 5  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our school will continue to utilize the New Visions Mock Regents program for Mathematics. Math Department will do a monthly assessment to track the progress of regents readiness beginning in January. Math team meeting minutes, as well as drafted documents will be submitted to the professional development team for discussion and feedback. Check points will occur between the principal and the PD team near November 30, January 1, April 30, and June 14, and June 27. School google platform will be utilized for transparency. Academic Departments will engage in mid-point semester finals administered in late January, aligned to regents tasks to assess the progress towards skill achievement. Data will be shared school-wide in February 2019, to inform instructional shifts. February results will impact the dedication of spring budgeting for after school academic intervention services and Saturday school programs. February results will also be used to determine the content of spring parent workshops, designed to support student achievement. Departments will use the data to drive instructional revisions to address the deficits of students. Finals will be conducted at the end of the fall term. Assessment data will be shared with all staff during the initial spring term teacher team meetings in February. September PD day will include a whole grade session to discuss progress, examine document drafts. Chancellor's staff development days will be dedicated to specific department collaboration in mathematics, including (if necessary) September 4, November 6, June 6. Additional student small group instruction will be offered (if necessary) during extended school holidays, including January 21-25, April 22-26. Our math department will offer targeted Parent Engagement workshops to offer resources for parents to support their children with regents, September 26 and May 9. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) New Visions Mathematics Curriculum in Algebra 1, Geometry, Algebra II New Visions Mock Regents tools School-based Mock Regents assessments Teacher and Department Scholarship Reports June NYS Regents Exams Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our school's Framework for Great Schools Report 2017 displays a need for focus and improvement in Supportive Environment areas. Specifically, we scored lowest in the Personal Attention and Support area with 52% of our students responding positively. Our lowest rated questions were 3B "in most or all of their classes, their teachers notice if they have trouble learning something" and 3E "in most or all of their classes, their teachers support them when they are upset" This infers the need for additional student supports, behavioral intervention protocols, and the use of informal assessment in all classes, as well as increased student engagement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, increase our sub area of Personal Attention and Support under the Supportive Environment category from 2.75 to meet our average within this area to 3.63. We will do this by focusing on school initiatives that will improve the following poorly rated sub categories by 20% each:  62% of students say that teachers help them catch up if they are behind. (Q3a)  52% of students say that teachers notice if they have trouble learning something. (Q3b)  39% of students say that their teachers support them when they are upset. (Q3e) 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All school staff will receive training of promoting an environment of respect and rapport for all students. Staff will examine areas of pedagogy which relates to cultural sensitivity, acceptance, and equity for all students. Staff will engage in a campaign across our school establishing clearly stated expectation of fairness and respect among staff and students, alike. All students and staff September 5-June 14, 2019 School leadership will create a structured AIS afterschool program designed to offer all student extended time to receive direct instruction, as well as additional work time to academic tasks. September 5, 2018-June 14, 2019 All pedagogues, principal, assistant principal, student support staff All grade-level advisors, Social Worker, teachers, support staff, community service coordinator, principal Peer Collaborative Teacher, Principal, Social Worker, Community Service Coordinator, PD Committee, all teachers Targeted Professional development sessions will explore social and emotional student supports, cohort readiness to access information, and outlets for student expression and behavioral interventions. Specific focus will be placed on opportunities for students to discuss definitions and views of safety in our school environment. Teacher teams will create grade level guidance for Advisory classes. Each grade level overview will focus on age appropriate skills, as well as relevant college and career benchmarks and introductions. Topics will address student concerns, encourage peer discussion, and guide student-lead solutions for improving Supportive Environments. Grade and department level teacher time will be dedicated to improving student engagement in all classrooms, specifically targeting 1)students taking academic risks, 2)positive teacher feedback, 3)and effective classroom systems for addressing student behavior. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement November 5, 2018-December 21, 2018 Grade level teacher teams, Principal, Social Worker, Community Service Coordinator September 5, 2018-May 1, 2019 Peer Collaborative Teacher, Lead Teacher, PD Committee, Principal All pedagogues, principal, assistant principal, student support staff All pedagogues, principal, assistant principal, student support staff 8  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be encouraged to schedule "open house" visits with our parent coordinator. Parents will be given an opportunity to spend half days (up to 3 classes) in our school, surveying classes, sitting in on school events, meeting with support staff to engage in conversation to better understand all school dynamics. Parents will be offered an opportunity to engage in learning walks, guided by our parent coordinator and guidance staff. Walks will include the various shared spaces of our campus and observations of our bulletin boards and student work. Parents will be invited to attend a monthly Breakfast with the Principal, to share feedback and explore alternatives to AIS and enrichment programs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Goals and responsibilities of Peer Collaborative Teacher, Lead Teacher, and Social Worker will be aligned to the work in Supportive Environments. Bi-monthly PD and Teacher Time sessions will be dedicated to the work to improve all sub-categories, specifically Student-Teacher Supports and Peer-Peer Supports, Safety, Class Behavior, and Personal Attention and Support. The master school schedule has been adjusted to include advisory sessions 2x per week (82 minutes) from the current 2x per week (50 minutes). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Survey Phase 1-December 2018 Survey Phase 2-February 2019 Survey Phase 3-May 2019 Capture feedback in Advisory sessions Advance Ratings Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-2019 School Surveys and PPO/QR visits School-created surveys inserted into advisory program Student Scholarship Reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As reflected in our 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, our school scored 2.90 in the area of Collaborative Teachers, indicating our lowest category. This was highlights by two (2) sub areas of the Quality Review Measures:  How thoughtful is the school’s approach to teacher development and evaluation? (4.1) RATED 2.00 General Quality Review Rubric Indicator 4.1 Support and evaluation of teachers through the Danielson Framework and analysis of learning outcomes a) Teacher growth supported by effective feedback and next steps from observations and data b) Feedback to teachers supports development and offers trends and next steps using the Danielson Framework c) Data informed professional development and teacher/administrator performance based decisions Specific Quality Review Results Click here to see the Quality Review report for this school.  How well do teachers work with each other? (4.2) RATED 2.00 All other sub areas under Collaborative Teachers were rated between 3.29 and 4.57. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 27, 2018 ensure that each classroom teacher enhances our learning community by participating in a teacher-centered PD plan, inclusive of a whole school intervisition program, producing improved scored in the targeted areas to 3.00, respectively. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School leadership will collaborate with department chairs and teachers to research, register, attend, and turn-key appropriate off-site and content related professional development events designed to impact specific departments. Create a unified, school-wide professional development schedule inclusive of whole staff, department, grade, advisory, ICT Team level meetings for the fall term. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers, Para-Profesionals, Peer-Collaborative Teacher, School Leadership, Support Coach all staff September 5, 2018-June 14, 2019 PD Committee, Principal, Assistant Principal, PCT, CA4A and CAFA Vertical Alignment Team September 5, 2018-June 14, 2019 PCT, Department Leaders, Principal, Assistant Principal Create school-based surveys for all teachers and paraprofessionals to identify pedagogical weaknesses and areas of interest. all staff September 5, 2018-June 14, 2019 PCT, AP, Principal Utilize HE rated teachers (2018-2018) to identify model classrooms and formalize a school-wide intervisition program for peer collaboration. all staff September 5, 2018-June 14, 2019 PCT, PD Committee, School Leadership, HE Rated Teachers . 3b – Parent and Family Engagement . . . How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will include teacher reflections in our quarterly Parent Newsletter detailing the professional development experience and the impact it will have on our classroom instruction and student performance. Teachers will offer weekly time during our Wednesday PD sessions for parents to engage in discussions about classrooms and curriculum. Parents will be invited to a monthly Breakfast with the Principal, to discuss updates and offer parent-view suggestions. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1  Chancellor's full days of PD (September 5, November 6, January 28, June 6) and September-May after-school teacher time will be used to complete this work. Grade and Department leaders will meet with school administration and PD team to ensure targeted PD sessions are identified, attended, and turn-keyed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Department chairs will support the school's goal of ensuring that all classroom teachers attend a minimum of one high quality PD session. a shared google document will allow all staff to monitor the PD selections of all staff, while documenting completion. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Critical feedback forms will be completed and collected at the end of each semester. Teachers will self evaluate the effectiveness of our PD cycles, both on their professional growth and classroom impact. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As the economic and political demographics of our population changes, we have realized the need for increased college and career planning supports. These supports include access to post secondary planning and preparation, infusion of technology to make this work possible, as well as academic enrichment programs to increase the potential for all students to be college and career ready. Currently, we have four (4) programs in partnership with CBOs that work in the post secondary readiness arena, including College Now, Kaplan SAT Prep, SEO Scholars, and The Opportunity Network. These programs can be selective and limited in the scope of student participation. These programs typically cater to 11th and 12th graders and serve approximately 65-75 student per year. We intend to broaden the scope of grades and students being served. A stated goal is to increase the number of student who gain access to college prep programs, ultimately increasing our college readiness index and college acceptances. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, implement two (2) new "in house" post secondary readiness programs at our school to increase student participation from 75 students to 200 students. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Principal and assistant principal will create a school-wide calendar for all students to embark on the pathway to the CDOS. The calendar will ensure that each eligible student will receive a minimum of one work related experience per week equaling one hour, until their total number is completed. Targeted staff will received training on multiple pathways options. Apply for and participate in the DOE's College Access for All (CA4A) initiative, to increase college access, exposure, and resources Apply for and participate in the DOE's College AP for All initiative to increase advanced course options, advanced course readiness, and vertical alignment within departments. Improve college readiness. Update and improve our school's technology resources to offer access to students. Apply for grants to upgrade a student tech center and classroom technology for instructional purposes. Secure and integrate an effective online and blended learning program for students. The programs would target students who need to make up instructional deficits, as well as students who would like to accelerate their academic progress. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All eligible students, targeted staff. September 5, 2018-June 14, 2019 Assistant principal, Guidance staff, Special Education Department All students All students September 5, 2018-June 14, 2019 School leadership, guidance staff, selected teachers. September 5, 2018-June 14, 2019 School leadership, guidance staff, selected teachers. September 5, 2018-June 14, 2019 School leadership, and cabinet September 5, 2018-June 14, 2019 School leadership, and cabinet School leadership, guidance staff, selected teachers. School leadership, guidance staff, selected teachers. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 4  All parents will receive information concerning CDOS/Multiple pathways, CA4A, APforAll, online learning, and technology enhancements at SLT, Breakfast with the Principal, and PA meetings. Parents will be given an opportunity to offer feedback and engage in the planning of new programs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title 1 funding dedicated to career exploration and college experiences (Budget codes IMXS, IM49), CA4A grants, APforAll grant, Technology Grant. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Increased AP offerings, increased AP enrollment as per our STARS programming, data examined on February 1 and June 14, 2019. Increased attendance on college tours, data examined on February 1 and June 14, 2019. Enrollment in NYS approved online courses, data examined on February 1 and June 14, 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. STARS reports Student attendance on school sponsored college tours AP enrollment and AP test scores Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school's 2018 Framework for Great Schools Report displayed a marked improvement in the Outreach to Parents sub area from 3.00 to 4.14 (93% positive response) and Parent Involvement in School from 3.22 to 3.88 (84% positive response). This data showed our rating as being above both the citywide and borough-wide rating in both areas. As parent involvement and satisfaction with our school is connected to every other category, we continue too strive for improvement. Despite the strong ratings in this area, we will explore ways to enhance the parent involvement during school days. We have examined our two lowest rated areas, below:  85% of families say that they get opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child.  63% of families say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. 93% of families say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn. (Q1a) 85% of families say that they get opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child. (Q1b) 97% of families say that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit their school. (Q1c) 93% of families say that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs. (Q1d) 6  97% of families say that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from their school. (Q1e) 96% of families say that their school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. (Q1h) 87% of teachers say that families are offered opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child. (Q9a) 91% of teachers say that teachers at this school understand families' problems and concerns. (Q9b) 91% of teachers say that teachers at this school work closely with families to meet students' needs. (Q9c) 100% of teachers say that staff regularly communicate with families about how they can help students learn. (Q9d) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 7  By June 14, 2019, Improve our Framework for Great Schools Report rating for Strong Family-Community Ties to from 3.93 to 4.00. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Following our September 28, 2017 Curriculum Night, conduct a "Parents As Learning Partners" open house week. Parents will have a full week to attend all classes in our school. Each day will include an anonymous feedback form for parents and a live debrief session with the principal. In conjunction with the SLT and PA, design workshops to examine curriculum maps and sample units/assessments with parents. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All parents All staff September 5, 2018-June 14, 2019 SLT, PA, all parents Monthly SLT, PA, Parent Coordinator Invite parents to join the team in creating the parent newsletter. All parents Quarterly Principal, assistant principal, clerical staff, PC Electronically expand the access to our classrooms and curriculum by integrating media outlets available to our school, including Teacher Designed Websites, School Media Accounts (Twitter, Main Website, Farm Website, Remind.com, PupilPath, PhoneMessenger). All parents September 5, 2018-June 14, 2019 SLT, School Leadership, PC Increase parent communications and outreach by utilizing multiple means, including voicemail, live phone calls, emails, direct classroom distributed letters, and postal delivery. All parents Host monthly Breakfast with the Principal meeting, open to all parents. each meeting will include a discussion session, round of parent feedback, and walking tour of classrooms in session. All parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 5, 2018-June 14, 2019 School clerical staff, principal, guidance counselor, parent coordinator September 2018-June 2019 Principal, PC If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. King Against Violence Initiative, BuildOn, Global Kids, Kaplan, New York Cares, Youth Farm, New Yorkers Against Violence Initiative, MCC Theater Company, Carnegie Hall School Partnerships, Wingate Health Clinic Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 9  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. This initiative will utilize all teachers during Wednesdays PD and parent time, Parent-Teacher dates (4), SLT meetings, PA meetings, Breakfast with the Principal (monthly) as well as dedicated office staff time for mailings, voice message activation. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Track all parent participation rates for Parent-Teacher conferences, PA events, and school trip. Create a brief feedback forum for all participants to submit comments and suggestions at all parent involvement events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Survey and Framework for Great Schools Report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Grade level teams will produce lists of struggling students at the mid-point of each marking period. Lists of struggling students will be created upon distribution of each marking period report card. Student Failure Reports will be generated in STARS. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) One-to-One Tutoring, Small Group Tutoring, Regents Targeted Prep, Peer Advisors Homework Help, Push In and Pull Out Resources for Academic At Risk Students, Exposure to Reading Resources (ie: side-by-side readers, books on CD), Barron’s Online and Rosetta Stone Programs (students are given at home access) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) ● Small Group and Individual Tutoring Available ● In class resources provided by support staff ● Resources available for “check out” for use at home ● Online Access to Interactive Resources When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● During scheduled classes ● Zero period, after school, and Saturday sessions offered throughout the year. ● After-school regents prep scheduled each semester Online Access September to June A list of students who failed or did not take a required regents is generated each semester from STARS. List of students in need of intervention based on attendance will be created using late logs and weekly attendance and cutting reports. The data team (principal, AP, guidance counselor, academic chair) will examine the data of Mathematics All incoming students with a math decileunder 2.0 will be scheduled for a targeted afterschoolmath  Additional Afterschool math support AISclass, 2x week/90 1 minutes per session ● During scheduled classes ● Small Group and Individual Tutoring Available ● In class resources provided by support staff ● Zero period, after school, and Saturday sessions offered throughout the year. ● After-school regents prep scheduled each semester ● Resources available for “check out” for use at home Online Access September to June Online Access to Interactive Resources AIScourse, two days per week for 90 minutes per day. One-to-One Tutoring, Small Group Tutoring, Regents Targeted Prep, Peer Advisors Homework Help, Push In and Pull Out Resources for Academic At Risk Students, Exposure to Reading Resources (ie: side-by-side readers, books on CD), Barron’s Online and Rosetta Stone Programs (students are given at home access) Science newly enrolled students. Grade level teams will produce lists of struggling students at the mid-point of each marking period. Lists of struggling students will be created upon distribution of each marking period report card. Student Failure Reports will be generated in STARS. A list of students who failed or did not take a required regents is generated each semester from STARS. List of students in need of intervention based on attendance will be created using late logs and weekly attendance and cutting reports. Grade level teams will produce lists of struggling students at the mid-point of each marking period. Lists of struggling students will be created upon distribution of each marking period report card. One-to-One Tutoring, Small Group Tutoring, Regents Targeted Prep, Peer Advisors Homework Help, Push In and Pull Out Resources for Academic At Risk Students, Exposure to Reading Resources (ie: side-by-side readers, books on CD), Barron’s Online and Rosetta Stone Programs (students ● Small Group and Individual Tutoring Available ● In class resources provided by support staff ● During scheduled classes ● Zero period, after school, and Saturday sessions offered throughout the year. ● Resources available for “check out” for use at home Online Access to Interactive Resources ● After-school regents prep scheduled each semester Online Access September to June 2  Student Failure Reports will be generated in STARS. are given at home access Social Studies A list of students who failed or did not take a required regents is generated each semester from STARS. List of students in need of intervention based on attendance will be created using late logs and weekly attendance and cutting reports. Grade level teams will produce lists of struggling students at the mid-point of each marking period. Lists of struggling students will be created upon distribution of each marking period report card. Student Failure Reports will be generated in STARS. One-to-One Tutoring, Small Group Tutoring, Regents Targeted Prep, Peer Advisors Homework Help, Push In and Pull Out Resources for Academic At Risk Students, Exposure to Reading Resources (ie: side-by-side readers, books on CD), Barron’s Online and Rosetta Stone Programs (students are given at home access ● Small Group and Individual Tutoring Available ● In class resources provided by support staff ● During scheduled classes ● Zero period, after school, and Saturday sessions offered throughout the year. ● Resources available for “check out” for use at home Online Access to Interactive Resources ● After-school regents prep scheduled each semester Online Access September to June A list of students who failed or did not take a required regents is generated each semester from STARS. List of students in need of intervention based on attendance will be created using late logs and weekly attendance and cutting reports. 3 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) At Risk Resource Room, Testing Modifications, Support Services Provided where appropriate. Small group counseling, one-to-one counseling, Family Support Outreach, Focus Groups, AIS Focus Sessions ● Regularly Scheduled Mandated and At Risk Counseling ● Parent and Family Support Sessions Test and Academic Stress Reduction Group Sessions ● Pull out and Push In support during school day ● Weekly ICT Teams common planning time with support staff feedback Grade Level and Department Meetings aligned to support staff goals and activities, weekly Monday meetings Students are referred for at risk intervention by the grade level teams, Pupil Personnel Team and SIT committee. Grade level teams will produce lists of struggling students at the mid-point of each marking period. Any member of staff may recommend students for at risk counseling services with evidence need. 4  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently, we have five (5) students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Our school will offer financial and logistical assistance to all displaced students, including uniform purchase and maintenance, eye wear/care not covered by insurance, general school supplies, and Kindle devices for electronic schoolwork. Students will receive medical support by our campus health clinic to ensure access to effective care. Our full time social worker will offer inclusion in group sessions, as well as individual counseling. Additional efforts to include STH in after-school programs, including academic interventions, nutritional services assistance and support with school trips, college tours, and college application fees. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 5  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Our focus remains securing and improving a highly qualified staff. In 2018-2019 the majority of our staff will remain highly qualified and display a high rate of retention. We do not anticipate a teacher departures. We continue to accomplish this through building a strong and cohesive school community. We support our staff through a variety of professional development opportunities and help each teacher reach further toward their potential. We also have many teachers who serve as mentors, having been highlighted both internally and by the city as expert teachers in their field. Our staff includes new teacher mentors, DOE teachers of the year, as well as individuals selected by the DOE as supervisors of Regents Grading and network workshop facilitators. Also, our hiring team consists of many members of our community and act as a very strong support for both the recruitment of strong pedagogues as well as their retention. As part of our vetting process, our hiring team considers level of teaching experience, innovation, educational philosophy, as well as additional skill and knowledge sets to be offered to our student population. Our entire staff is offered access to professional development, each month. Lists of PD opportunities presented off-sire are shared with our staff, weekly. We have designed need-specific weekly PD opportunities offered by our network, New Visions. In addition, our administration leads PD sessions each week, as well as teacher/department designed and lead PD, monthly. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Weekly Professional Development: Rotating targeted groups (grade level, academic departments, advisory level, and whole group). Lead by Principal, AP, and UFT Chairman for whole staff on Monday afternoons. Topics are selected and designed based on staff requests and need assessments. In 2018-2019, the staff has chosen to focus on several items: Expanded Support for SWD, Creation of Student-Selected Focus Groups, and Expansion of our Advisory and Community Service programs. 7  All sessions will be teacher-centered and department lead, ideas for cross curricular, department support, and content specific sharing. In anticipation of the 2018-2019 calendar, we have begun to plan our professional development focus. We have successfully sumbitted an SBO to move our PD time into the school day. As a result, we have extended the length or our school day four days per week (Mon, Tues, Thurs, Fri) to make room for the PD and Parent Outreach time on Wednesday afternoons. Our rotation will integrate a fair and effective disbursement of time to Whole Faculty, Grade Teams, Academic Departments, Advisory-Level Teams, and ICT Teams. The rotation offers ( 9 grade level sessions, 10 department sessions, 4 advisory sessions, and 6 whole staff sessions, exclusive of full day professional development opportunities. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. not applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). not applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Not Applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 8  Our entire school uses ongoing teacher team sessions to review, discuss, and determine the assessment selections for our students, including MOSL, benchmark and baseline options, as well as in class predictors for regent’s performance. The information is disaggregated in department, grade level, SLT, and cabinet meetings. All members of the school faculty, as well as our parent community is involved in the decision-making of school-wide assessment and preparation 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A/4B, 5B/4B, 5C/4B, 5D/4B, 5E/4B 5A/4B, 5B/4B, 5C/4B, 5D/4B, 5E/4B Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local 324.810.00 2, 672,357.00 x x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 9  conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy High School for Public Service: Heroes of Tomorrow 2018-2019 Parent Involvement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 17K546, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Our school offers several points of entry for parents to actively participate in the planning and discussion of our Title 1 programs, CEP, and PIP. The CEP draft is created in conjunction with our SLT, in spring. The SLT draft is submitted for feedback by DOE reviewers. The draft with reviewer comments is shared at the first SLT meeting and PA meeting of the school year (by September 30). Draft revisions are discussed with parent representatives and submitted for final approval. 1  Title 1 programs are discussed with parent attendees at the September PA meeting and proposals are shared with the principal. Our school will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; Our school will focus on sharing school goals and recent developments in education policy and reform with all parents. In order to create an expectation for success, a college and career culture, our parent events will reflect parent needs. September and May parent conferences will offer content specific workshops, as created by direct parent requests. Conferences will include grade level support mechanisms, systems for tracking your child's academic progress, and strengthening the ability of all parents as partners in education. September Conferences will allow al parents to learn about the content and syllabus for their child's courses. This will enhance an understanding of teacher expectations and create parent partners for our school 2  November and March Parent Teacher Conferences will focus on individual student performance in all content areas, with opportunities for parents to engage their children in discussions about methods for improvement. May conferences will focus on grade level workshops designed to involve parents as transitional partners as student move from grade to grade. Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; 3  ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  Increasing the frequency of hosting parent visits and learning walks during school hours.   Initiating communications with parents of potential incoming students during the 7th and 8th grade through community and cultural events high school fairs, JHS visits, and open houses. Increase the frequency of our parent newsletter and written parent correspondence to recruit/encourage parent involvement while increasing awareness of school events.  Recruit parent chaperones for all school trip.  In conjunction with our SLT and PA, all parents events, including Parent-Teacher Conferences/Workshops will be planned as high interest opportunities. ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 4  School-Parent Compact (SPC) 17K546, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 5  ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 6  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 7  ● always try my best to learn. I have read this policy and understand my role in ensuring that all criteria are met. I understand that this policy has been written with the collaboration of the parents and educators of the High School for Public Service. 8  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 17 School Name High School for Public Service Borough Brooklyn School Number 546 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Sean Rice Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Dale Britton (School for Huma Teacher/Subject Area Jason Zanistch/ English-Drama Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Rachel Mickenberg Superintendent Donald Conyers Assistant Principal Marisa Boan Coach School Counselor Darlene Miller Parent Luke Delfeus - PA President Parent Coordinator Eric Ferreira Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 9  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 490 Total number of ELLs 9 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.84% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The school uses DRA to determine reading levels before the teachers begin to plan their instruction. Differentiated instruction begins with this DRA pre-assessment. The ESL teacher utilizes previous assessments that are available including NYSTELL, NYSESLAT, and NYS ELA, MATH, Science, and Social Studies scores as well as periodic assessments data recorded in Acuity, to plan instruction. In addition, or if previous scores are not available, the teacher utilizes teacher created pre-assessments and individual observations and conferences to purposefully plan the instruction of each individual student. . The ESL teacher incorporates the Common Core Standards and NYS Standards in content areas to plan instruction for ELL students tailoring instruction to meet individual needs. Whether teachers differentiate content, process, products, or the learning environment, the use of ongoing assessment and flexible grouping makes this a successful approach to instruction. 0  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Ninth grade students are assessed during the three day summer Bridge program to establish a starting point for instruction. The teacher works with the content area teachers throughout the year to plan instruction based in the individual needs of the students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our ELL's are held to to same Common Core Standards as all students. In the past, we have been very successful in having our students pass the NYSESLAT exam, in addition to all Regents Exams. Our graduation rate for ELLs is 100%. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teachers meet in grade level meetings once a month to discuss student progress across the content areas. This, along with common planning time for our co-teachers, is embedded into the schedule so that teachers may effectively plan for instruction after analyzing assessment data. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Does not apply 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data from the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL exams reveals that students who enter HSPS at the Intermediate Level(Transitioning) progress to Advanced level(Expanding and Commanding) within one year. Those at the Advanced Level test out in one year. The combination of ELL program with additional support in the Writing Workshop course enables students to become proficient in about one year. Last year only 1 student did not achieve proficiency on the NYSESLAT, however he was able to pass of of his courses in 9 th grade. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teacher meet in monthly grade level meetings to discuss the progress of our students. This provides an opportunity for our shared teacher to pan for instruction as he is able to attend different grade meetings throughout the month. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The High School for Public Service is a small school which currently serves approximately 460 students. The school is a screened school and therefore has a limited amount of ESL students to serve. Because of our extremely small population of ESL students (6/460 or .013) the school has elected to implement an Instructional Model of Free Standing ESL Program with our students attending classes at the School for Human Rights (Wingate Campus School). Students attend class together for 4 periods each week from 11:10 to 12:04. This class is part of the regular program even though they attend at another school (School for Human Rights). This is a Free Standing ENL class of mixed abilities. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable 1  c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The Free Standing ESL program exceeds the requirements of the mandated number of instructional minutes for the proficiency level of our current student. ESL, ELA, and NLA instructional minutes are delivered as follows: As a Free Standing ESL Program: • Language Arts is taught using ESL and ELA methodologies. • Content areas are taught in English using ESL strategies. • Emerging Students receive 360 minutes of required instruction each week in Stand-alone ENL and Integrated ENL/ELA classes. . Transitioning and Expanding Students receive 180 minutes of required instruction in Stand-alone ENL and Integrated ENL/ELA classes. The High School for Public Service EXCEEDS the State requirements providing students with 240 minutes per week of ELA instruction in a class which is taught by a certified ELA teacher and 240 minutes per week of ENL instruction by a qualified teacher using the Free Standing ESL method of instruction. All students at the Transitioning and Expanding Level receive this instruction. • Students are provided with additional support though after school academic programs 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content areas are taught in English using ENL strategies and methodologies. All students receive 240 minutes of instruction in each major content area each week. Strategies for vocabulary and oral language development are infused in each classroom. Teachers participate in professional development workshops at the school level for 60 minutes each week. These workshops are conducted by the Administration and Teacher-led professional development team. Workshops on integrating ENL strategies are conducted as needed. Grade meetings and department meetings allow for teacher collaboration in order for the ENl teacher to provide content area support to the Ells; A Peer Collaborative Teacher works closely with each department in order to provide opportunities for collaboration and the sharing or materials and assignments. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are provided all testing accommodations as set forth by the NYS Education Department. These accommodations which may include translated versions and/or extended time or a third reading allow our ELLs to be appropriately evaluated. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The High School for Public Service has utilized differentiated instruction practices for over 5 years. Our school serves as a model within our network for differentiation. All teachers incorporate differentiation, regardless of the subject matter or level of student and this address the needs of SIFE students, ELL's in schools less than 3 years, Ell's receiving service for 4-6 years, and Long-Term Ell's. Differentiated instruction at HSPS recognizes students varying background knowledge, readiness, language level, preference in learning, and interest. We utilize differentiated instruction as a process of teaching and learning for students of differing 2  abilities(SIFE, Newcomers, Ell's receiving service 4-6 years, and Long-Term Ells) in the same class. The intent of our instruction is to maximize each student’s growth and individual success by meeting each student where he or she is and assisting in the learning process and English language acquisition. Differentiated instruction begins with a pre-assessment. The ESL teacher utilizes previous assessments that are available including LAB-R, NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, and NYS ELA, MATH, Science, and Social Studies scores as well as periodic assessments data recorded in Acuity, to plan instruction. In addition, or if previous scores are not available, the teacher utilizes teacher created pre-assessments and individual observations and conferences to purposefully plan the instruction of each individual student. . The ESL teacher incorporates the Common Core Standards and NYS Standards in content areas to plan instruction for ELL students tailoring instruction to meet individual needs. Whether teachers differentiate content, process, products, or the learning environment, the use of ongoing assessment and flexible grouping makes this a successful approach to instruction. ESL Teachers differentiate at least four classroom elements based on student readiness, interest, learning profile and English Language level: • Content – what the student needs to learn or how the student will get access to the information; • Process – activities in which the student engages in order to make sense of or master the content; • Product – culminating projects that ask the student to rehearse, apply, and extend what he or she has learned in a unit; and • Learning environment – the way the classroom works and feels. Content Examples of differentiating content for ELL students include the following: Using reading materials at varying readability levels; Putting text materials on tape; Using spelling or vocabulary lists at readiness levels of students; Presenting ideas through both auditory and visual means; Meeting with small groups to re-teach an idea or skill for struggling learners, or to extend the thinking or skills of advanced learners. Introduce and develop new vocabulary visually to the lower level students by using a picture dictionary and other visual aids Use bilingual dictionaries during reading and writing assignments in order to clarify meaning when possible Use leveled texts or adapt texts by shortening or simplifying language to make the content more accessible Use technology and multimedia (e.g, software, books on tape, etc.) and graphic organizers Published or electronic bilingual dictionary (a synonym dictionary, without definitions, in the student’s native language Process Examples of differentiating process for ELL students include the following: Using tiered activities through which all ELL learners work with the same important understandings and skills, but proceed with different levels of support, challenge, or complexity depending on the ELL level; Providing interest centers that encourage students to explore subsets of the class topic of particular interest to them; Developing personal agendas (task lists written by the teacher and containing both in-common work for the whole class and work that addresses individual needs of learners) to be completed either during specified agenda time or as students complete other work early; Offering manipulatives or other hands-on supports for students who need them; and Varying the length of time a student may take to complete a task in order to provide additional support for a struggling learner or to encourage an advanced learner to pursue a topic in greater depth. Products Examples of differentiating products for ELL students include the following: Giving students options of how to express required learning (e.g., create a power point with visuals, write a letter, or develop a mural with labels, record their report); Using rubrics that match and extend students' varied skills levels; Allowing students to work alone or in small groups on their products; and Encouraging students to create their own product assignments as long as the assignments contain required elements. Learning environment Examples of differentiating learning environment for ELL students include: 3  Making sure there are places in the room to work quietly and without distraction, as well as places that invite student collaboration; Providing materials that reflect a variety of cultures, languages and home settings; Setting out clear guidelines for independent work that matches individual needs; Developing routines that allow students to get help when teachers are busy with other students and cannot help them immediately; and Helping students understand that some learners need to move around to learn, while others do better sitting quietly 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The school uses a differentiated instructional model for ELL students which allows for the selection of various texts in all content areas. Teachers select text based on the reading level of each ELL. Technology is infused into the curriculum and all students have access to the text in audio version if needed to support their learning. The Writing Workshop class uses Thinking Reader as supplemental material. We do not have any students whose IEP mandates bilingual instruction. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In order to meet the diverse needs of Ells within the least restrictive environment students receive ELA instruction for 240 minutes per week instead of 180 minutes as mandated by law. We are also able to provide 240 minutes per week of ELL support and instruction. The teacher works closely with the content area teachers to assist in the selection of texts and in sharing teaching strategies for these students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. A targeted intervention program is offered for students in ELA. A review of data includes 7 th and 8 th grader assessments in order to determine which students are at Level 1 or Level 2. In addition, the school looks at the performance assessments in science in order to determine if they require additional content area instruction and/or support. Students participate in a Writing Workshop class for 240 minutes each week. This class utilizes ESL strategies and supports the work of the other content areas. Targeted intervention is also utilized in other content areas depending on the needs of the student. Using the results of periodic assessments, teacher created tests, and Regents exams, students in need of intervention are identified and place in appropriate courses to support their learning and english language acquisition in the content areas. Currently the school offers an intensive Scientific Inquiry course to support the ELL's in the area of science and will offer a Global Studies course in the Spring which will prepare students to meet the writing challenges of the Regents examination. Our data shows that we do not need to offer targeted intervention in Mathematics for our ELL students. If in the future it is determined that there is a need then the school will offer targeted intervention in the area of Mathematics for our ELL students. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Writing Workshop continues to incorporate non-fiction texts in order to prepare the students for future Common Core Assessments. The teacher plans to include topics in biology which will also increase their performance in science. In addition, the school is now offering ELA electives in Journalism, African-American Literature, and Feminism. These courses, like all, are available to our ESL students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL’s are afforded equal access to all school programs. Currently there are no specific programs offered after school which are targeted to ELL’s. Our current population does not allow for specific programs targeted for just 2 students. We currently offer the following curricular and extracurricular activities at HSPS: 4  Geometry Tutoring (2x/week), Algebra 2 Tutoring (4x/week), Chemistry Tutoring (one-on-one), US History (one-on- one). We also offer extracurricular activities which are available to all students including ELL's: Farm Club, New Yorkers Against Guns Violence, New York Cares Club, Student Government, Documentary Film Making, Crafters Club. One of our ELL students participates in extracurricular activities. The other ELL has a part-time job after school that he enjoys. All PSAL sports are also available to our ELL students. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The school uses a differentiated instructional model which allows for the selection of various texts in all content areas. Technology is infused into the curriculum and all students have access to text in audio version if needed to support their learning. The Writing Workshop class uses Thinking Reader as supplemental material. Native language materials include dictionaries and glossaries in all the content areas of Science, English, Social Studies, and Mathematics. In addition, the school maintains a library that includes high interest fiction and non-fiction materials along with audio-visual resources. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Glossaries and dictionaries are available for home language support 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The Assistant Principal, with the help of the Guidance Counselor and Programmer, assures that all students have the required services. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The school uses a differentiated instructional model which allows for the selection of various texts in all content areas. Technology is infused into the curriculum and all students have access to text in audio version if needed to support their learning. The Writing Workshop class uses Thinking Reader as supplemental material. Native language materials include dictionaries and glossaries in all the content areas of Science, English, Social Studies, and Mathematics. In addition, the school maintains a library that includes high interest fiction and non-fiction materials along with audio-visual resources. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). An orientation is held in June prior to admission to provide information about curriculum. This orientation helps the students understand the curriculum, learning standards, expectations for students, and assessments. This orientation occurs in June of each year. Students are given an informal writing assessment to assist with class placement. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We are a small school and are only able to offer Spanish to all of our students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We do not have a Dual Language Program. 5  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All subject area teachers, Special Education teachers, ESL teachers, and paraprofessionals participate in professional development workshops at the school level for 60 minutes each week (each MONDAY of the year) as part of the new teacher contract. These workshops are conducted by the school administration and by a teacher-led professional development committee. In addition, assistant principals, guidance counselors, social workers, parent coordinators, and school secretaries receive 60 minutes of professional development each month integrating strategies for use with ELLs and in parent development. The SBST, which includes school psychologists, occupational/physical therapists, speech therapists and additional social worker participate in professional development to me the needs of ELL. This professional development is provided by the Field Support Network personnel which supports the School Based Support Team. Secretaries and Parent Coordinators attend workshops related to their position and include workshops on meeting the needs of ELL students. Department led professional development with a focus on the Common Core Standards is held for one hour each month. Teachers also attend network and city professional development workshops. each month. This year we have a Peer Collaborative Teacher who will focus on Common Core Standards. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. A Ninth Grade curriculum night is held each year to make parents aware of the curriculum and classroom expectations. Ninth grade questionnaires help teachers to better understand students' strengths and weaknesses. Teachers are scheduled for 4 hours of professional development each month. In addition, professional development sessions are held for 8-10 days during Regents examination weeks. During this time teachers are provided with workshops and training that fulfill the 7.5 hours requirement for training of all staff members in ELL strategies and instruction. Teachers work individually and in teams to develop appropriate curriculum for the students. In addition, teachers attend national conferences as participants and presenters to further develop their craft. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school sets asides time each Tuesday afternoon for parent meetings. The ENL teacher, along with content area teachers, utilize this time to meet with parents on a regular basis to discuss the progress of students. Outreach is done via telephone calls, emails, and individual parent meetings at the school. Initial parent orientation is held in September to discuss the goals of our [program. Additional meetings are held 3-4 times per year to discuss the student's language development progress, assessment results, and additional needs in all content areas. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent involvement in our school is growing. Currently the Parent Coordinator arranges two family meetings each month. Attendance at these meetings has been growing steadily since the decision to hold one meeting in the evening hours and one on a Saturday. In addition, the Parent Coordinator arranges monthly workshops and/or presentations based on the parents’ needs and interests. 6  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. None 7 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Sean Rice, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 8  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: High School for Public Service School DBN: 17K546 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Sean Rice Marisa Boan Eric Ferreira Dale Britton Luke Delfeus Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Jason Zanitsch Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Darlene Miller School Counselor Donald Conyers Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 8/01/2017 8/01/2017 8/01/2017 8/01/2017 8/01/2017 8/01/2017 08/01/2017 9  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 17k546 School Name: High School for Public Service Superintendent: Richard Cintron The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Marisa Eric Jessica Boan Ferreira Dales Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL Teacher Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Using the Home Language Identification Survey, and the ELL Parent Orientation we may determine the translation services needed to meet our students’ needs. We review data provided on Blue Emergency Contact Cards and the RAPL and RCPL reports from ATS. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 0  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Araucanian Arabic Bengali Chinese Cantonese Fanti French Fulani Haitian Creole Italian Jamaican Creole English Spanish Soninke Urdu Yiddish 1 6 10 1 0 1 8 3 24 0 1 588 58 0 4 0 .14 .85 1.41 .14 0 .14 1.13 .42 3.39 0 .14 83.17 8.2 0 .57 0 1 7 11 0 1 1 8 4 25 0 1 587 57 0 4 0 .14 .99 1.56 0 .14 .14 1.13 .57 3.54 0 .14 83.03 8.06 0 .57 0 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Blue Cards September Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. As provided by DOE. Use DOE Intranet templates for covered languages. School-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages. 1  Curriculum Night Invitation September Lunch Forms September Opt-Out Letters September Family Handbook/Student Handbook September ENLs Entitlement Letters Report Card Letters 4 Times a Year As provided by DOE. Use DOE Intranet templates for covered languages. School-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages As provided by DOE. Use DOE Intranet templates for covered languages. School-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages As provided by DOE. Use DOE Intranet templates for covered languages. School-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages. DOE Translation & Interpretation Unit for translation into covered languages and DOE vendor will be used for the non-covered languages.The Parent Coordinator has arranged for free translation from the Translation Unit to provide services to translate the Family Handbook into 3 languages, Haitian Creole, Spanish, Bengali. As provided by the DOE. Use DOE Intranet templates for covered languages. School-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages. DOE Translation & Interpretation Unit for translation into covered languages and DOE vendor will be used for the non-covered languages. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Parent-Teacher Conferences September November March May Freshmen Orientation for GE, ELLs, and IEP students June Open School Night September Guidance & Discipline Our school conducts ongoing outreach, intervention, and support meetings for families on a need basis. These meetings are scheduled and unscheduled. Daily/Weekly Our staff also conducts daily outreach via phone, email, and Phone Messenger voicemails. Daily/Weekly(Wednesdays) IEP Meetings Monthly SLT Meetings Monthly provide interpretation service(s)? We use bi-lingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages through telephone interpretation and translation vendors for translation into non-covered languages as needed. We use bi-lingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages through telephone interpretation and translation vendors for translation into non-covered languages as needed. We use bi-lingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages through telephone interpretation and translation vendors for translation into non-covered languages as needed. We use bi-lingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages through telephone interpretation and translation vendors for translation into non-covered languages as needed We use bi-lingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages through telephone interpretation and translation vendors for translation into non-covered languages as needed We use bi-lingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages through telephone interpretation and translation vendors for translation into non-covered languages as needed We use bi-lingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages through telephone interpretation and translation vendors for translation into non-covered languages as needed. 3  PA Meetings Monthly Parent Workshops September & May We use bi-lingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages through telephone interpretation and translation vendors for translation into non-covered languages as needed. We use bi-lingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages through telephone interpretation and translation vendors for translation into non-covered languages as needed. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The school first relies on staff members who are fluent in other languages. When this is not available, we use over the phone translation services. We have found d this service to be extremely reliable and professional. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the beginning of the year all staff members are reintroduced to the resources that are available at the school and the DOE that are available for translation services and parent outreach. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) School will expose all parents to the DOE materials and services, as indicated in DOE materials. Materials are posted at several locations throughout the school. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 4  Parent coordinator will gather feedback at parent meetings. We use bi-lingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages through telephone interpretation and translation vendors for translation into non-covered languages as needed. Parent coordinator will use email as a follow up source for parent feedback. 5 
