 32K554 School Name: ALL CITY LEADERSHIP SECONDARY SCHOOL Principal: ELVIS ESTEVEZ   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  Section 1: School Information Page School Information All City Leadership Secondary School 32k554 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: 333200011554 Grades 6 to 12 321 Palmetto Street 718-246-6500 School Number (DBN): 718-254-6500 Fax: Elvis Estevez eesteve@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 32 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Elvis Estevez RikkiBetancourt NorbertaDiaz Elvis Estevez Aracelis Abreu Joseph Duran Alyahgibbon n/a District Information Janice Ross Superintendent: 1396 Broadway- Rm. 110, Brooklyn, NY 11221 jross11@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-455-4635 Phone Number: 917-239-1892 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Room 501, Brooklyn, NY 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-3954 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Elvis Estevez RiikiBetancourt NorbertaDiaz Mirtha Franco Karen Sanchez Joseph Duran AliyaGibbons Jennifer Hernandez Diana Gomez Fatima DeLuna *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Parent Parent Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Cynthia Otero Tie Asia Mobley Parent Member/CSA Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? All City Leadership Secondary School's mission is to educate students to develop their social and intellectual skills needed to succeed in a post-secondary setting.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. All City Leadership Secondary School (ACLA) was established on July 1, 2003 as a school community serving students from grades six (6) to twelve (12). The ideas that shaped the culture of our school was drawn from a concept paper- developed by administrators, teachers, parents, and students- that was proposed and accepted by the Chancellor’s Office via the creation of New Visions small schools. The basic concept of our school community evolved out of an existing middle school program called All City Leadership Academy in Brooklyn’s District 32 which had as its core belief the following: to assist parents in the formation of their children. Since then, ACLA’s mission has been modified but continue to reflect the central theme of forming young people within our charge: to educate students to develop their social and intellectual skills needed to succeed in a post-secondary setting as defined by the New York State Common Core Standards (please refer to the following link to review those standards: http://www.p12.nysed.gov/ciai/common_core_standards/ ). In addition to the aforementioned, ACLA has partnered with Riseboro (RB) to provide important ancillary service to our students’ families that include counseling and mental health services, immigration assistance, GED studies, after-school and summer programs for students in grades K to 12, and employment opportunities for our high school students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The specific need for our special needs student population continues to be for them to learn in a safe and nurturing environment. The many constituencies that work collaboratively together (parents, community based organization members, staff, teachers, administrators, and students) ensure that the social, physical and emotional needs of all of our students are met with an equitable program of study that allows each student to demonstrate his or her intellectual potential in being able to be at or above the performance levels of the common core standards by the time of their high school graduation. For students who have an Individualized Education Plan (IEP), identified as an English Language Learner (ELL), or have achieved the highest performance levels on state assessments, every opportunity continues to be given to ensure that their needs are met in either bridging the cognitive skills that have yet to be performed in classroom work and state examinations via academic intervention services and/or by providing rigorous course electives within our school’s instructional program above the high school course requirements surrounded by a caring community within our school building. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. An area of the Framework that our school made the most progress over the past year continues to be in building trust. This key area of focus will continue to be our target as all other areas of the framework, then, follow; particularly student achievement as found in the annual end of year state exam results and our high school graduation rate. The Framework for Great Schools (FGS) has allowed our school community the opportunity to investigate the policy itself from the NYCDOE (please refer to the following link http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/C955EF12-EBBC-4B41-AF8D-20597C55DF0C/0/StrongSchoolsStrongCommunities_NYCDOE.pdf ) and, in the upcoming school year, further reflect on the work entitled, Organizing Schools for Improvement: Lessons from Chicago , by Anthony S. Bryk, Penny Bender Sebring, Elaine Allensworth, Stuart Luppescu, John Q. Easton, from which FGS is grounded. Initial conversations in professional learning meetings continue to support FGS and the elements contained therein- though more data needs to be researched by our school community to make the connection between what the overall investigation yielded from the Chicago study, which was based solely on elementary schools, and the direct applicability to secondary schools in general. Nevertheless, and as is supported by the annual release of the School Survery, year after year Trust continues to be rated high among school constituencies from families of both middle and high schools. 0  The good news about FGS is that it completely compliments, if not validates, the original concept of the founding of our school community and is certainly aligned to the mission of our school. Within all of the stake holders of our school, the sense of trust in one another is the social adhesive that binds and gives credence in approaching every decision that is made for any action that occurs within our school. We believe, above all, that trust is at the forefront of all the FGS elements that has been quantified from all of our constituents. From student programs, school trips, parent involvement, staff professional learning, social events, etc., we are all organized around the concept of helping students achieve post-secondary readiness by the time they graduate from our school. The evidence of this quantification can be found each year from surveys that are distributed to students, parents and teachers by the NYCDOE– please refer to our most recent survey: http://schools.nyc.gov/OA/SchoolReports/2013-14/Survey_2014_K554.pdf . An area of focus for next year will be analyzing and evaluating the FGS element that involves rigorous instruction. Using Hess’ Rigor Matrix, our faculty will be developing syllabi, unit and lesson plans to ensure that an appropriate measure of exposure to content and depth in understanding will be present across all classroom in order to, once again, be aligned with our aforementioned mission. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 32K554 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 435 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 26 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 13 8 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 77.7% % Reduced Lunch 1.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 76.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 8.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 15.26 6% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 93.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 95% 90% 97.4% 35.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 23 23 94.9% 8.0% 8.0% 8.3% 7.1% 0.2% 4 12% 5.1 92.4% N/A 93% 95% 97.4% 37% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An analysis of our most recent College Readiness metric from our Quality Snapshot indicated that 70+% percent successfully completed approved college or career preparatory courses and exams, 70+% graduated college ready (met CUNY's standards for avoiding remedial classes), and 82% graduated form high school and enrolled in college or other post secondary program within 6 months. Area of strength and needs: we have programmed all students within this cohort to take the necessary classes that would provide for the opportunity to sit in for the appropriate Regents exam and address any performance skills and/or concepts that require remediation. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. ● By June 2019, at least 80% of students in the 11 th grade cohort as of June 30, 2018, will graduate with a NYS Regents Diploma in 2019. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students who are in need of achieving the college readiness score either in ELA or Math (or both) will be registered for an appropriate English or mathematics class throughout the school year. The curriculum that will be used will be based on Engage NY for the Common Core Algebra Regents and a focus on Argumentative writing for the ELA Regents. Progress Reports will be mailed home to families of students who will be enrolled on these courses. HS students who have taken both the Algera and ELA Regents September to June 2019 ELA & Math Teachers will implement curriculum, APs of ELA and Math will supervise instruction and Guidance Department will provide support for students where needed (identify and register students for after school programs and/or provide SEL support) 12th grade students who are on register as of September 2018, will continue to meet with the guidance team to ensure that they are on pace to graduate by June 2019- i.e., taking the necessary courses and regents examination. Planning sessions will occur throughout the school year with parents and twice a week the students will be visited by the Guidance Team to assess their progress toward a post-secondary plan after graduation. Current 12th grade students September to June 2019 Guidance Department and AP of Guidance 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents are key to our goal of providing a caring community both at school and at home. Engaging parents in a meaningful and productive way in their older children's educational journeys helps complete the team of support that is vital to a child's well-being. We engage families in a variety of ways. Through the use of io education, we provide a portal for parents to have real time access to their children's academic progress and attendance. This provides us with the opportunity to engage in meaningful, real time communication. AP Rivera will monitor use of io education by teachers to communicate with parents. 4  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to achieve the aforementioned goals, we have planned to have dedicated periods for the respective subjects mentioned for the college readiness courses and have deliberately made them so that the classes will not exceed a 20:1 student to teacher ratio. In addition, we have also programmed the guidance team and their respective students to meet for a minimum of two periods a week during an advisory period. Finally, per session funds have been made available to allow for the guidance team and teachers to meet with parents after-school or during the weekend to discuss the progress of their children. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By mid-November, the Principal will meet with the guidance team and the Math and ELA teachers to discuss the progress of students. Teachers will analyze results on baseline and interim assessments to assess progress of students. We expect that students will show positive measurable growth in the particular skills studied during the intervening course units. The midpoint benchmark is to have at least 75% of the class show improvement from the baseline exam to the interim assessment. In addition, we will make adjustments to any course syllabi or program to further accommodate student needs as required. The graduation Tracker will be used to monitor individual student progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) For each math and ELA class, a comparison of baseline to interim assessment data will show improvement in assessment results for either reaching, or surpassing, our 80% target. For each term, the Regents offered in January and June will be the terminal evaluation as to whether we have achieved our goal or are in need to modify the targeted list of students in need of academic intervention. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? ● Research shows that attending school is only part of the equation for being successful academically. Attendance, therefore, is a priority for a school in order to help achieve our school’s mission of preparing students with the necessary skills to be effective citizens beyond the secondary level. ● In addition, 11 th and 12 th grade students will spend a minimum of 90 minutes per week discussing, developing, and finalizing post-secondary plans with the Guidance Team. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. ● To ensure that a school-wide attendance rate of 90% or higher will be achieved by June 2019. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Daily attendance will be taken by teachers of all students. Students who are absent will have a post-card immediately mailed home. If repeated absences should occur, the guidance team will make a phone call to the parent- a follow-up meeting with the student by guidance will occur to assess the absences. If no contact is made with the home or no response is given by the caregiver, the attendance teacher will be sent to the house to investigate any excessive absences. Attendance Awards will be issued to students who meet goals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students September to June 2019 Teachers, Guidance Team and AP Guidance All Students February and June Guidance How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents are key to our goal of providing a caring community both at school and at home. Engaging parents in a meaningful and productive way in their older children's educational journeys helps complete the team of support that is vital to a child's well-being. We have a variety of planned parent meetings throughout the year to address particular student needs. The guidance department meets with parents of 11th graders in the spring to help prepare for senior elective selections, the college application process and financial aid documentation for their child's upcoming FAFSA. A meeting with 9th grade parents informs them of a variety of educational programs available for their children, including Minds Matter and SEO Scholars. Weekend parent workshops throughout the year complement our support for parents including Nutrition Workshops, Helping Students Cope with Homework Stress, and computer skills classes for parents to get them up to speed on the basics of internet access and email use to help communicate more effectively with the staff. Key personnel include our parent coordinator, guidance counselors, teachers to provide weekend workshops, and the administrative team that oversees the implementation of these parental supports. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Aside from postage used to mail home information and phone calls made by our staff, the Attendance Team (which includes Asst. Principal, the Guidance Team, Attendance Teacher, and pupil personnel secretary) will used to investigate each excessive student absence or absence without notification by the parent in order to achieve our goal. 7  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● Daily attendance reports will be generated by the Assistant Principal and made available to all staff. Information and updated lists of absent students will be used to notify the absent student’s caregiver. An interim report will be made in November, January, March, and May to assess overall patterns. ● At the end of each month the Guidance team will meet with the principal to provide updates on students in the 11 th & 12 grades. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance Reports from ATS. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1) As reported on the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, ACLA received a score of 4+ for the "collaborative teachers" category ("Teachers participate in opportunities to develop, grow, and contribute to the continuous improvement of the school community. 89% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that, at their school, teachers design instructional programs together. 94% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school teachers make a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching with instruction at other grade levels. 100% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school the principal, teachers and staff collaborate to make the school run effectively. 100% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school teachers talk with one another about instruction. 2) Teachers will continue to work collaboratively in teacher teams to help improve student instructional outcomes. To date, the NYC Department of Education has yet to publish the official results of high school performance data for schools. Unofficially, and based on an internal analysis, our school community earned a 100% high school graduation rate based on discharge codes entered on ATS as of July 2018. In Middle school, and as published by the NYS Education webiste, 93% of our middle school students earned an "at or above" grade level designation for both ELA and Math. The evidence taken, then, from teacher team artifacts suggest that for the remaining 7% of our middle school population who did not score a performance level at or above their spring 2018 grade, will need unique small group attention after-school support to build on the capacity of the ELA and or Math skills found to be deficient as evidenced in the item skill analysis of the RMSR ATS report. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. ● To provide a minimum of two assessments per term to assess and evaluate student growth for our most at risk students. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher Teams will be organized to meet during professional periods to analyze and evaluate student work from the ELA and Math assessments administered each term and modify the delivery of instruction to our most at-risk students. Lead Teachers from Math and ELA will attend District AP/Lead meetings to receive the most up to date strategies in assisting students within these subject areas who are deficient or need remediation of skills tested within these academic subjects. By June 2019, our most at-risk students will see an increase of at least 1 reading grade level. Student will be grouped in various settings (heterogeneous, homogeneous) to have their work evaluated 3 times per term throughout the tear by teacher teams. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher Teams September to June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals Faculty September to June 2019 Assistant Principal, Lead Teachers Students September to June 2019 ELA and Math Teachers - AP ELA and AP Math Administer two item skill analysis assessments in ELA and Math to students so that Teachers may evaluate the current performance level of students within each skill level being tested Students ELA/Math Teachers - APs of ELA and Math October, December, February and March 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Newsletters and calendars sent home to families will communicate highlights of teacher professional development and teacher team meetings to continue to keep families informed of the resources available to them through our school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Where appropriate, schedules will be modified to leverage maximum teacher participation in inter-visitation and Teacher Teams assessing student work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 0  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 1st: An evaluation of HS Regents examinations, end of term assessments (for non Regents taking students in HS) and the two middle school exams both in ELA and Math will be analyzed by Teacher Teams to monitor student growth toward goals to inform instruction and adaptation for further intervention or a continuation of the strategies that are successful in the classroom. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Within each subject that ends with a state assessment, prior Regents exams, writing samples, anecdotal conversations with students by teachers, writing assignments, alternate assessments as needed, and their final state assessment score will be used to evaluate students and our instructional as well as our professional learning programs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. From the 2017-18 school quality guide, specifically within the Framework element score and of the past three years- Effective School Leadership has been rated with the scores of 4.65, 4.67, and 4.84 respectively. Frankly, given the upward trend within the highest performance level within this category, and relative to the responses, the administration will continue working within the scope of the daily interactions with all constituencies and the goals set for the school year as mentioned in other sections of the CEP. Priority: continue to provide relevant and high quality professional development within school and beyond to teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 1. 100 % of teachers will be given professional development with our school and via district, Central or other appropriate settings that address pedagogical practices needed to conduct high quality lessons. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Development will occur once a week for all teachers to discuss pedagogical practices and evaluation of end of term assessments to improve student achievement. Inter-visitation of teachers will occur to support non-evaluative feedback form fellow colleagues on best practices. Teachers SY 2018-19 Administration, District and Central PD Teachers SY 2018-19 Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through ongoing monthly newsletter communication and monthly SLT meetings, our school will engage families to support parent leadership and engagement. The principal and assistant principals will be responsible for implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. With regard to the formal/informal observation of teachers, there will be no disruption to the schedule. With regard to the inter-visitations of teachers, the use of substitute teachers will be employed to facilitate in this valuable collegial learning experience. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Regarding Teacher Teams: November, January, March and May will be used to assess student progress with respect to the baselines given in early fall. 3  Regarding observations: end of October, December, February, April and May will be used to assess the quantity and quality of observations of teachers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher Presentations during PD (which will include assess student work based on rubrics), observation notes by supervisors and observations reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: as evidenced from the 2017-2018 school survey- 94% of Parents enjoy the Outreach to them Need: Connect Parents to resources beyond the school to meet needs Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 1: The principal will host a “Welcome Back” meeting for parents during the first week of school- during this time, school programs, after-school programs, and services rendered by our community based organization partner will be presented. Goal 2: The Parent Coordinator will have monthly workshops for parents Goal 3: The principal will continue his practice of monthly coffee hour sessions with parents. Goal 4: On or before April 15, the principal will organize two Parent Symposium for all parents sharing resources for families outside of our school building while providing Social Emotional Support from our community based organization each school day. Goal 5: Monthly newsletters will be mailed out to parents. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Goal 1: During the first week of school, the principal will communicate with parents our school goals, in-school programs, after-school programs, and community based organization services that are available to each family. During this time, parents of students with IEPs and/or who are identified as ELLs will also have the opportunity to hear and ask questions about the various support programs that are offered to assist students and families. Goal 2: The Parent Coordinator will have monthly workshops for parents on various topics. Goal 3: The principal will continue his practice of monthly coffee hour with parents. Mr. Estevez will hold these informal meetings to welcome available parents into the school building, present any updates, and provide for a question and answer forum for all who attend. Goal 4: By April 2019, the principal will organize a Parent Symposium for all parents. Topics will include: ELL and special education strategies that can be used at home; resume-building for parents and students; common core standards explanation; homework without fear-strategies to assist with homework. Goal #5: Monthly Newsletters will be mailed home. Updates on the school programs, individual attendance reports and progress reports will be mailed home. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents Principal On or before the first full week of school in September 2018 Parents SY 2018-19 Assistant Principal Parents Oct 2018-April 2019 Principal Parents April 2019 Principal Parents SY 2018-19 Principal If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Riseboro Community Based Organization Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 6  Budgetary resources will be used to contract service providers for our parent symposium. Funds have been set aside for parents to enjoy a complimentary breakfast during the Parent Coordinator’s workshops, and funds for postage will be set aside to ensure the delivery of necessary materials to inform parents to their homes. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. From September to June, the Principal will meet with the School Leadership Team to assess the delivery of services to parents mentioned above as a vehicle to measure the effectiveness of building strong family ties and community relationships. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Surveys conducted by the Parent Coordinator, Feedback from Principal/Parent Meetings, and information gathered during monthly PA meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group instruction within a small class. After-school with small group instruction When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) 2 additional periods (totaling 100 minutes) of ELA Monday through Thursday 180 minutes per week after-school Small group instruction within a small class. 2 periods (totaling 100 minutes) of ELA Monday through Thursday After-school with small group instruction 180 minutes per week after-school Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who have been classified as the lowest performing third of the 9 th grade based on their 8 th grade ELA and Math State scores (includes Special Ed and ELL students). Students who performed at the bottom third in the middle school ELA State Exam will have after-school assistance to remediate deficient skills. Students who have been classified as the lowest performing third of the 9 th grade based on their 8 th grade ELA and Math State scores (includes Special Ed and ELL students). Students who performed at the bottom third in the middle school Math State Exam will have after-school assistance to Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Lightsail Reading Program to improve Lexile scores; argumentative-style of writing will be the focus of developing writing skills Using Continental Press’s ELA program, both reading comprehension and writing skills will be addressed Common Core Algebra math skills will be targetedfor remediation via practice regents questions, tutoring, or direct instruction Using Continental Press’s Math program, all numeracy skills will be addressed via practice questions 8  remediate deficient skills. followed by tutoring or direct instruction Science Social Studies HS students who have not passed a science Regents will be programmed for an extra period of Regents prep. Students who have been classified as the lowest performing third of the 9 th grade based on their 8 th grade ELA and Math State scores (includes Special Ed and ELL students). At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Both mandated and students who request or are asked to be seen by the Guidance Team (GT)will be part of this at-risk program. Using Barron’s questions generator of questions, students will practice their comprehension of concepts on Regents-like questions Using a highly successful curriculum developed by Mr. EchChaouy, our SS teacher, students will use the reading, writing, speaking and viewing skills to engage the US curriculum to assist in earning passing grades on the US History Regents. Using the one-on-one strategy or small group Advisory session, the GT will apply the necessary skills to assess and assist students who are in need of services. Small group instruction. In-school service 1 period of 50 minutes per day 4x per week Small group instruction within a small class. 2 periods of 50 minutes each four days a week. Individual or small group instruction Minimum 1x per week for one period or as needed. 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 7 students have been identified as STH students. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students are seen by our Guidance Team 1x per week and "as needed" basis for support, funds are used that have been earmarked on Galaxy from the City are used to purchase supplies- i.e. STH funds. Basic emergency supplies (e.g., uniforms, school supplies, books, glasses, etc.) and other educational services (e.g,, counseling services, intervention programs) will be provided to assist the STH population. Additional support is provided by our Community Based Organization with social services. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment: When staff positions become available, we utilize the NYCDOE’s Open Market system or contacts within education programs of Colleges to fill positions. Retention rate: our retention rate for the past 10 years is 100%. The administration celebrates staff accomplishments during professional development at least twice a year. Assignments: staff members are assigned to classes based on their state certification. Professional development: including our weekly common planning time, we encourage teachers to seek opportunities to develop practice or content delivery with professional development opportunities. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Via our instructional support from our superintendent, available DOE webinars, and turn-key professional development from our staff, we are utilizing various venues of staff development for faculty members and the administration to become well versed in the CCSS. For example: in the Humanities Department, they are utilizing student work in argumentative essays to address CCSS. In the STEM Departments, they are using the design of questions and the process of solving problems to address CCSS. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Each spring, supervisors conduct a needs assessment of our school community regarding assessments. Teachers have input with regard to the exam they will administer which include unit-ending exams or periodic assessments from the DOE. In addition, faculty members receive professional development on evaluating assessments via item skill analysis training to support instruction and remediation of student performance skills. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) AIS services will be provided, in part, with allocating these funds for small class sizes to Title I Part A (Basic) Federal $311,904.00 x 3  Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal 0 0 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2,642,516.00 x accommodate small group instruction. AIS services will be provided, in part, with allocating these funds for small class sizes to accommodate small group instruction in addition to providing after-school academic supportprograms and necessary instructional materials. 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 4  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. All City Leadership Secondary School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students [All City Leadership Secondary School] will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 6  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 7  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) All City Leadership Secondary School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 8  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 9  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 0  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 1  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Brooklyn District 32 School Name All City Leadership Secondary School School Number 554 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Elvis Estevez Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Ana Marie Flores Teacher/Subject Area Jessica Tancreto, ELA Teacher/Subject Area Nilka Acosta Related-Service Provider Stacey Murray Superintendent Karen Watts Assistant Principal Raymond Basilotta Coach School Counselor Michael Quinones Parent Liza Febo Parent Coordinator Yasmin Rosa Field Support Center Staff Member Martin Abrams Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 433 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 7 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.62% 3  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 3 4 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 3 10 11 12 3 1 0 0 0 0 0 3 3 1 0 Tot # 7 0 0 0 0 0 7 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1. To assess early literacy skills, we regularly administer baseline exams to gauge and monitor student progress throughout the year. Teachers use data from such administrations to inform their instruction. In addition, and in certain subjects (ELA and Algebra) we utilize practice Regents examinations to further inform the staff on student content mastery at the beginning, middle and end of year to assess and monitor student progress in the content areas and to modify instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Actual built in time above the mandated minutes required for instruction to administer and assess the examination, In addition, time is also provided within the schedule for teachers to meet and plan intervention strategies for their students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 4  We measure the success of our program by one benchmark question? Will the student obtain, at minimum, a Regents Diploma? Therefore, we look not only at the NYSESLAT, but all the required Regents exams as a gauge for student achievement. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Actual built in time above the mandated minutes required for instruction to administer and assess the examination, In addition, time is also provided within the schedule for teachers to meet and plan intervention strategies for their students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Across proficiency levels, data shows that students are the least proficient in the areas of reading and writing. As students progress from intermediate to advanced, speaking and listening are the areas in which they are most proficient, while reading and writing consistently score lower. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teacher team meetings are formed to discuss results and to monitor student groups toward achieving annual goals. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction is delivered primarily via the free-standing (pull-in) model. Students are scheduled as mandated by New York State for the appropriate number of classes per day. Students are grouped in heterogeneous groups by grade level and by ungraded, homogeneous groups by proficiency level. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Beginner students (this year we did not have a beginner category) would be given 500 minutes of ESL instruction per week. Our intermediate students are given 360 minutes per week of ESL instruction and our advanced students are given 180 minutes of ESL instruction, as well as 200 minutes of ELA instruction per week. 5  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All of our teachers use English as the primary language of instruction. Every effort is made to pair our ESL students with Spanish speaking teachers (as most of our staff is fluent in the language). We utilize the workshop model in the delivery of our instruction focusing on vocabulary identification and development in order to bridge content that is not known by students and pairing it, where possible, to their common experience. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish-speaking students who are newly enrolled are given the LAB-R in Spanish by a pedagogue who is fluent in Spanish. Students who can read and write in Spanish are offered Native Language Arts classes, taught by a certified Spanish teacher who previously evaluates their native language using various assessments. We have not have any new students who only speak Spanish to this point, but if the case should arise, we plan on evaluating their transcripts, administering the ALLD, and if possible, having our Spanish teacher give them an assessment in their native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 6a) Currently, we do not have any students in the SIFE category. However, in the past, we have modified the schedule of the student to ensure the mandated ESL classes in addition to supplementary support that would afford students access to acquiring language skills at an accelerated pace- for example, vocabulary development classes associated with the subject area the student is studying or literacy websites (Lighsail) that would assist students in assessing and improving lexile scores of students. 6b) Newcomers are the required ESL classes as noted earlier in this document, with one class period per day focusing on Language Arts. 6c)ELLs receiving service for 4-6 years are given different options, depending on how their language skills have progressed. Students who have moved up to the advanced level are given 180 minutes of ESL, as well as 180 minutes of ELA per week. Students who have not progressed to the advanced level are given or 180 minutes of ESL per week and upto 360 minutes of ELA per week. They are also offered the same supports and tutoring as newcomers and SIFE segments. 6d) Long-term ELLs are also given the number of minutes per week according to their proficiency levels. 6e) Former ELLs are still eligible for testing accommodations. They are allowed to have a push-in ESL teacher at their parent's request, and are also permitted to enroll into the Saturday Academy and PM School Programs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The instructional strategies we have found most beneficial has been increasing the vocabulary development of students within the context of writing using argumentative essays. This strategy has helped our students who have taken the ELA Regents exam. However, and it will be explained in a latter section, more instructional time is needed with students to assess its benefits. We utilize Continental Press's Empire NYSESLAT curriculum in helping our students with their literacy skills and performing well on the NYSESLAT exam. In addition, and as mentioned before, we began using the LightSail reading program (along with Vocabulary.com) and found students excited with these instructional programs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 6  As with all of our Special Education students, Special Education ELLs are given options that allow them the least restrictive environment. They are offered flexible scheduling and can be placed in general education classes in certain subject areas, as per their IEPs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. A variety of targeted intervention programs are used for ELLs in all content areas: -After-school tutoring in Social Studies, Science, and Math (Spanish-speaking teachers present to assist content teachers) -Visual Learning web-based program for ELA/ESL: Vocabulary.com and LightSail Reading programs -Bilingual glossaries and dictionaries available in all subject areas - Saturday tutorial programs for our ESL/SWD students (3 hours per week) -Our community based organization providing additional ESL support after-school 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In addition to the required ESL classes as required by the State, we will offer 450 minutes of ELA, 450 minutes of Algebra, and 450 minutes of US History instruction for our intermediate and Advanced students. We believe that by extending the amount of time needed for specific activities for students to accomplish and retain in these subject areas, students will have the opportunity to focus their attention on specific material and vocabulary terms to assist them in passing the Regents as required in their first year (i.e. US History and Common Core Algebra.) This, then, we believe will serve as a foundation for years 2 and 3 in modelling the extended time model with fewer Regents to administer in those given years so that our ELL/SWD students can graduate on time and have the access to the advanced regents diploma in year 4. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Single period instruction in ELA, Math, SS, and Science during year 1. Instead, we will double the time and team together the teachers of the aforementioned subject areas irrespective of grade level. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Ever student, including ELLs, have equal access to all programs. No one is excluded from pursuing any school-time or extra-curricular activity. In fact, it is encouraged in our daily morning announcements. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We are aware of the potential for technology to aid in language development and acquisition. Teachers are offered projectors so that they can use PowerPoint and other software to more easily incorporate visuals and other ELL-friendly components into their teaching. We have also added a SMARTBOARD to the ESL room as well as a computer cart in order to provide students with all possible technology to make their learning more accessible and engaging. Additionally, we have a computer/library that is open after school for students to work on projects and/or essays and college applications. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In all content areas, there are measures taken to give native language support to ELLs. Though many teachers teachers speak Spanish, bilingual glossaries are available in the subject areas, as well as bilingual dictionaries. Moreover, teachers meet with ESL teachers to find materials in the native language when possible. Flexible grouping is also used in the classes. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ELLs are provided with additional support in a PM School or Saturday class, which is supported both our Community Based Partner and Per Session funding from our school. During that time, students are engaged in learning activities based on their current grade and English proficiency levels. The program incorporates literacy skills, content based instructions, and reinforces daily instructional class work. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 7  We are aware of the potential for technology to aid in language development and acquisition. Teachers are offered projectors so that they can use PowerPoint and other software to more easily incorporate visuals and other ELL-friendly components into their teaching. We have also added a SMARTBOARD to the ESL room as well as a computer cart in order to provide students with all possible technology to make their learning more accessible and engaging. Additionally, we have a computer/library that is open after school for students to work on projects and/or essays and college applications. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All newly enrolled students meet with Principal Estevez, Guidance Counselor Quinones, ESL Provider Martinez, and Parent Coordinator Rosa. They are immediately paired with a student in their class as a "buddy" and are incorporated in the daily activities of our school. Students are instructed to see any of the aforementioned adults as needed as we have an open door policy with every student. Periodically, the guidance counselor and parent coordinator check in with the student until such time that the student has fully acclimated into our school community. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Language Electives offered are: Spanish for native speakers and AP Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All staff receive the mandated professional development required for staff. In the past, the Network coaches have provided the professional learning with regard to best practices, methodologies in teaching ELLs, and vocabulary development. In an effort to assist teachers, administrators, and support staff in addressing the needs of ELLs, the following professional development opportunities and the use of the common core, staff have agreed to use a common course syllabi across the school which includes sections of "differentiation" and "common core standards." In addition we encourage the following: • Encourage staff to register for graduate courses in differentiated instruction and ESL methodology • Continue to train teachers, administrators, and guidance counselors in technology and web-based programs for ELLs from Network coaches (we expect the Borough support offices will continue to provide PD in this area) • Continue to provide teachers, administrators, guidance counselors, psychologists, and other staff with professional literature to build awareness as to the needs of ELLs and best practices to address those needs. • Continue to train teachers and administrators in Common Core Standards and how they apply to ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Students and parents are invited to attend student orientations that are offered in English and native languages in late spring and early in the new school year. At these meetings, families meet with teachers and administrators to discuss the school 8  year, calender, expectations and coursework. Additionally, the principal holds monthly Principal/Parent meetings to meet with all parents, including ELLs, in assisting parents and their children in assimilating to our school community. Throughout the year, the entire staff is trained in ELL strategies. This has been done either by Network staff or by our ESL provider. These meetings can occur during our regularly scheduled professional learning time, Chancellor Conference Days, or as assigned by the principal. Records are kept with sign-in sheets and agendas which are housed in binders in our main office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our school has 2 marking periods per semester as an initiative to inform parents pf their child's progress throughout the semester as per their child's program. Our ESL and content area teachers schedule parent meetings and send out progress reports as needed. In addition, parent coordinator assists with the outreach as well. The school invites bilingual staff members to translate to Spanish speaking parents during these conferences. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our school has an active parent coordinator who assists the executive members of the PTA to hold monthly PTA meetings. ELL parent participation is high in these meetings and they are conducted in English and in Spanish. The PTA meeting have great participation of teachers as well. The school invites bilingual staff members to translate to Spanish speaking parents during these conferences. Additionally, we hold an annual Parent Symposium with parents to discuss common core standards, resume-writing, immigration services etc. All with Spanish speaking translators. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Elvis Estevez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: All City Leadership Secondary School DBN: 32k554 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Elvis Estevez Title Principal Tie Asia Mobley Assistant Principal Yasmin Rosa Parent Coordinator Ana Marie Flores ENL/Bilingual Teacher Norberta Diaz Parent Stacey Murray Teacher/Subject Area Tanya Weeks Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Micahel Quinones School Counselor Karen Watts Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/1/18 6/1/18 6/1/18 6/1/18 6/1/18 6/1/18 6/1/18 1/1/01 1/1/01 6/1/18 6/1/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 32k554 School Name: All City Leadership Secondary Superintendent: Karen Watts The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data which inform us regarding LEP parents is derived from various sources: interviews with parents and/or students, demographics as listed on our school's DOE website, or their expressed written desire to receive communication from the school in their langauge. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Spanish is the only langauge in which translation has been requested in interviews or via parent surveys. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Monthly newsletters and calendars, report cards, after-school program information, test dates, annual handbooks, letters from the school leadership team. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent Teacher Conferences as prescribed by the DOE for the high school division. Our annual Title I, Special Needs, and ELL meeting (held on the first Friday evening in September when students return from school). Monthly principal/parent meetings the first Tuesday of every month. Monthly Parent Association 3  meetings the second Saturday of every month. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school is in full compliance regarding translation and interpretation. We ensure that all families are welcomed and have access to the language that they comfortably speak. To date, spanish has been the only langauge in which our families have requested services in translation. As mentioned above, we have many staff members, including the principal, who are fluent in spanish. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In addition to meeting every single family who is accepted to our school, our Parent Coordinator provides an annual survey for parents to assess langauge needs. This year, we will have the document translated in Arabic, Cantonese, Manderin, and Polish to assess any new needs that may develop in the upcoming school year with our new students. 4 
