 15K592 School Name: KHALIL GIBRAN INTERNATIONAL ACADEMY Principal: WINSTON HAMANN   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Khalil Gibran International Academy 15K592 331500011592 9-12 School Number (DBN): 362 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn NY 11217 718-237-2502 Phone Number: 718-488-1724 Fax: Nicole Nicolas NNicolas@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Winston Hamann John Yanno Alicia Cooper Ahmed Elmaliki Assya Hussain Nuri Gbenebitse Sarah Mohamed N/A District Information Geographical District: 15 Superintendent’s Office Address: Richard Cintron Superintendent: 335 Adams Street, Room 504, Brooklyn, NY 11201 RCintro@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-923-5124 Phone Number: 718-923-5145 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Affinity Schools Alexandra Normaliza FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5618 Phone Number: 718-935-5941 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Winston Hamann John Yanno Alicia Cooper N/A Assya Hussain Nuri Gbenebitse Sarah Mohamed Tarek Elabsy Ahmed Elmaliki Laurie Komarovsky Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ UFT   Name Mohsen Mohamed Elisa Lazarini-Poulakas Chad Cooper Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our school's mission is to develop, maintain, and graduate life-long learners who have a deep understanding of different cultural perspectives, a love of learning and a desire for excellence with integrity. We promote holistic student development by supporting learners to grow socially, emotionally, physically and intellectually.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The heart of our curriculum focuses on academically-rigorous, standards-based, data-driven, differentiated instruction (UDL) that prepares students for quality higher education and fulfilling life-long careers. Through our English and Arabic language program, students graduate with the bilingual and bi-literate skills needed for multicultural contexts. In addition, we are also now offering French as part of the International Baccalaureate (IB) Diploma Programme track, as the school received accreditation from the IB organization to start offering IB Diploma Programme courses in September 2015. Khalil Gibran International Academy (KGIA) provides students with an environment where they and their families feel connected to a community that is focused on their success. To that extent we have a strong college and career plan that includes a number of college tours throughout the year, the Naviance college platform and a new partnership with the College Access for All initiative. The entire KGIA community comprised of teachers, administrators, support staff, parents, students and our main partners, the Arab American Family Support Center (AAFSC) and ENACT Inc., foster an inclusive environment celebrating, respecting and valuing all perspectives. KGIA, along with its partners, is dedicated to providing a diverse, supportive, student-centered and collaborative learning environment, where young people reach their full potential and grow into responsible global leaders who will impact the world around them. Khalil Gibran International Academy serves grades 9-12. Our first cohort of students graduated on June 27, 2016 with a graduation rate of 68%. Our last cohort graduated on 6/25/2018 with a June graduation rate of 77% and a potential 85% graduation rate in August. The school population is comprised of 271 students, with 40% Black, 33.4% White (Middle Eastern), 16.7% Asian, 6% Hispanic, and 3.4% other students. The student body includes 35.2% English language learners and 16.4% special education students. Boys account for 55.7% of students enrolled, and girls account for 44.2%. The average attendance rate for the 2017-2018 school year was about 86%. Besides offering Arabic and French IB as second languages, we also have a TBE program (Bilingual Arabic) and celebrate the Arab language and culture. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. ENL and special education population needs support in classrooms with content teachers. These work together with co-teachers to make language and content readily available. For the special education population content teachers work together with special ed teachers to differentiate and scaffold the curriculum / lessons. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. As per our last Quality Review, two elements from the Framework for Great Schools that were highlighted include supportive environment and effective school leadership. We received a well-developed rating for quality indicators 3.4 and 4.2 of the rubric. Our school has established a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Our teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and the school as a whole, and they have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Another aspect of success is related to the nurturing of the professional growth of teachers and staff, ensuring that they have the ability to develop and deliver the instructional and socio-emotional support that drives student achievement. Two elements that our school needs to focus are rigorous instruction and strong family-community ties. Our curriculum and instruction needs to be more customized, inclusive, motivating, and closely aligned to the Common Core. We received proficient ratings in quality indicators 1.1, 1.2, and 2.2. Students need to become more actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity, while developing critical thinking skills. This needs to be evident in their 0  written work, as well as the in-depth discussions they have in the classroom. Students need to take ownership of their own learning and accurately self-assess their progress; particularly for pre and post diagnostic data as evident through performance tasks. Furthermore, we would like to positively help students apply their learning outside the school walls. We are and will continue to bring resources from the community by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. We also just elected a new PTA Executive Board whose members are very committed to the continuous growth of the school. In addition, our staff has been communicating more with parents and documenting those efforts while encouraging media and digital involvement for updated information and home-school connections on real time. As a school which graduated its first cohort in June 2016, its first IB full DP group in June 2017, and increased the graduation rate by almost 10 percentile points in June 2018, we look forward to continue reflecting on our past three years, highlighting our strengths and working on areas of improvement. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 15K592 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 270 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 5 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 4 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 3 School Composition (2017-18) 87.0% % Attendance Rate 83.0% % Reduced Lunch 35.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 1.5% 7.8% 30.7% % Multi-Racial % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.09 4% 22% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 69% 62% 62.7% 9.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 40 40 84.8% 3.3% 17.4% 38.9% 17.8% 4.8% 2 22% 6.1 N/A N/A 75% 72% N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Students engage in evidence-based discussion and produce high standard work products across classes not limited to: Claim, Evidence, Reasoning scientific conclusions in Science, Socratic seminars in the Humanities subjects, and instructional activities such as Contemplate then Calculate in Mathematics. (QR) Performance tasks and in-class assignments are differentiated and allow for student choice. Students also have the opportunity to provide feedback for rubric assessment criteria (QR) Daily instructional lessons as well as assessments and performance tasks are aligned to NYS and Next Generation standards. Student feedback is provided in a variety of platforms that include but is not limited to rubrics, per assessment, Google forms data analysis, and recorded audio feedback to meet the needs of our various general education, IEP and ENL populations. Furthermore, rubric feedback is aligned to NYS and Next Generation standards. Focus: Benchmark assessments showcase student knowledge, but a more systemic approach is needed for demonstrating student progress for individual units of study (QR) Assessment tracked via performance tasks, formative and informative assessments. Humanities based online rubric consisting of written auditory feedback for written work. Exit slips assessed daily using technology platforms such as Google forms, Kahoot, and the electronic platform Quizzes, and interrater reliability scoring. Both students and teachers have access to the data of the formative and informative assessments. Increase students’ engagement by implementing student IB Learner Profiles aligned to the IB Diploma Programme expectations, and creating a venue for teaching students effective habits of learning. Supporting student learning by ensuring professional development is tailored to teacher strengths and areas of improvement. Facilitating more opportunities for teachers to attend PDs in state and out of state during the school day/year. Each grade level should focus on a different scaffold skill set such as developing claims; supporting claims with evidence and analysis; gathering and assessing relevance of that evidence, and reasoning. Part 2 – Annual Goal 3  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 90% of all subject area teachers will develop two units of study incorporating various means of assessing student work to ensure measurable growth for all students. The impact on student growth will be measured by regularly revising scholarship and assessment results with a minimum 3% improvement rate. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional development targeted to enhance teachers differentiation strategies and data analysis Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers 11/18-6/19 Principal, Assistant Principal, Professional Learning Committee Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Teacher Mentors Administrators and Department Chairpersons Internal coaching and supportive mentoring Teachers 9/18-6/19 Strategic, data-based instructional groups tailored by unit data and assessment results Students 9/18-6/19 Unit assessments that align with already established performance tasks and co-created rubrics Students 10/18-6/19 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. SLT teachers in collaboration with the PTA and ENACT will plan and deliver workshops during PTA monthly meetings and/or other parent engagement venues to address parental understanding of rigorous instruction and the common core, including specific skills and structures to support students at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Curriculum and two units of study for each respective core subject. 12 teachers and 2 administrators will participate during regular department meetings. IEP and ENL teachers will join as indicated. - School Implementation Team, ADVANCE online tool, IO Classroom, Google communication logs, the Danielson Framework for Teaching, and the Capacity Framework. - Collaboratively created performance tasks that permit student choice with co-created rubrics. This will be done during common planning periods and time allotted specifically for this purpose during faculty meetings. 5  - Teacher-created calendar of lessons that are aligned with each unit of study for each content, accompanied by pre and post assessments articulated and shared with students in advance. - Department teams working collaboratively on these assignments, with cross-content partnerships if possible. Use of professional collaboration time and preparation periods to make this happen. - Purchasing of materials and resources that would enable and facilitate online and in person work productivity. - Professional development for teachers and administrators through New Visions, the Affinity network and the IB organization. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. - By February 2019, at least 90% of content-area teachers will have developed and shared one unit of study that uses pre and post assessments (baseline and performance tasks) to determine and measure scholarship and academic skills progress in all of our students. - It will be discussed at the School Leadership Team (SLT) meetings every month to check on progress. - It will be discussed during the monthly meetings with the departments to check on the quality of assessments, performance tasks, and accompanied rubrics. - It will be part of tailored professional collaborations for school-wide or sectioned guidance on receiving and applying feedback of improvement on upcoming performance tasks with accompanied pre and post assessments, scaffolds, groupings, collaboratively created rubrics with students, etc. - We will showcase one example/model during Election Day PD and then two models during the January PD. - It will be brought up during the monthly meeting with the archive coordinators to ensure that appropriate collection of material is occurring. By engaging in these six steps at different times each month throughout the year, we'll make sure to determine if the school is making progress meeting this goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Results of pre and post assessments in addition to January Regents; periodic review of student work and department revisions of performance tasks and rubrics. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Areas of celebration: - Inclusive learning environment with individualized support from ENL and SPED teachers. - Rigorous IB program that promotes college-level work in a positive and supportive learning environment. - Small class sizes for TBE, ESL, LOTE, and the arts. - Guidance counselor and social worker support with scheduled transcript reviews (schedules) - ENACT plays an active role in student support and co-plans activities with guidance - College and career related workshops and activities (school log) - PDs for ENL parents and increase in use of IO Classroom (Pupil Path) anecdotals. Focus: - Transparent communication with families and students through anecdotals, and grades through PupilPath, emails, meetings (QR) - Attendance improvement of at least 4 % - More clubs and extra-curricular activities - Mentorship program among seniors/juniors, sophomores/freshmen and IB students - Stronger structures to deal with cutting to improve student attendance and academic performance - Balance of fieldwork experiences between enhancing curriculum and uplifting school spirit. - New for 2018-2019: College Access for All dedicated college counselor. 7  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 3% increase in the positive and relevant responses from the "NYC School Survey" and the "Students Perception Survey" from May 2018. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? A minimum of 2 ENL trainings for teachers with individualized teacher support which will include content and push-in teachers facilitated by ENL teachers. Teachers 11/18 - 4/19 Selected trained teachers ENACT and the AAFSC classroom and after school programs to support students attendance and positive interactions Bi-weekly attendance meetings facilitated by the attendance coordinator and joined by administrators, counselors, and the parent coordinator. Restorative Circles protocol will begin to be implemented in classrooms, after-school PD sessions, and student enrichment activities. College and career tours and activities: The College and Career Readiness (CCR) Committee led by our new College Adviser will create a schedule of events for students to attend monthly or bi-monthly post-high school opportunities, including visits to local, State and out of State colleges, and for college representatives to visit us as well. Students Students 9/18 - 6/19 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers 9/18 - 6/19 Attendance Committee Staff and Students 9/18 - 6/19 Selected trained staff members Teachers and Students 10/18 – 5/19 College and Career Readiness (CCR) Committee Learning Development Plans - Discussed and revised during IPC meeting, MPC, and EOY conferences Teachers 10/18 - 6/19 Principal, Assistant Principal, Staff Google Drive documents for family outreach, lateness tracking, and other accountability systems Teachers and Students 9/18 - 6/19 Entire School Community IO Classroom Anecdotal Logs 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers, Parents and Students 9/18 - 6/19 Principal, Assistant Principal, Technology Coordinator, and Staff How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Attendance outreach to families will be performed by parent coordinator, attendance team, and individual teachers. This will happen on a daily basis from 9/18-6/19. 9  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - School culture survey monitored by SLT members that is aligned to the DOE school survey and the student perception survey and quality indicator 3.4 of the SQR rubric. - Staff learning development plans as discussed during IPCs and completed by October 31, 2018. - Detailed guidance counselor groups, shared with advisory teachers and implemented check-in progress. - Attendance meetings with agenda and minutes. - College and career activities articulated in school calendar and coordinated by staff and college counselor. - Professional development trainings facilitated by staff and supported by feedback from the Professional Learning Committee (PLC). - Human resources will be dispersed in the form of further advisory roles taken on by teachers to support the guidance support. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant X SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be one community meeting hosted by the Principal and Assistant Principal to verbally discuss supportive environment characteristics with the school community. A mid-point benchmark to be used will be our attendance rate and students scholarship report to determine on-track graduation status for all cohorts. This meeting will be comprised of students, faculty, family and community organization members. SLT check-ins monthly, as evident by agenda and minutes posted on the school's domain. Share results with parents in Spring PTA meeting. Monthly meetings with guidance, selected teachers and support personnel. Whole staff or targeted groups evaluative meetings, every other month, to check on progress and target the areas of growth which need improvement, beginning in November 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Decrease in school related incidents entered in OORS and monthly check in of student to student and student to staff interactions in and out the classroom. Monthly review of ATS reports during attendance team meetings. 0  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Areas of celebration: - Teacher led professional development meetings that are developed based on needs of ENL learners, special education and technology. Increase opportunities for teachers to lead PD on best practices related to the Danielson Framework for Teaching which will lead to increased instructional capacity (QR) - Flexibility in student schedules to make up credits during the academic school year Focus: - Department meetings structured to promote a coherent approach to the implementation of effective strategies weekly/bi-weekly embedded into all staff members schedules - Schedule does not permit for all co-teachers to meet during the school day (STARS) though there has been a significant improvement - Continue outline of roles and responsibilities of content/SPED/ENL/push-in/pull-out teachers for planning, implementing, reflecting, adjusting, and sharing strategies and skills being used to positively impact the academic needs of students; particularly ENLs, SPEDs, IB students, and lowest-third (Internal school assessment.) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams and collaborative teaching partnerships with SPED and ENL teachers will utilize the inquiry approach through intra-visitations to improve student learning, as evidenced by 80% of students in grade 9 earning at least 8 credits, 75% of students in grade 10 accumulating at least 20 credits, 70% of students in grade 11 having at least 30 credits, and the school's graduation rate being at or above 77% for the 2019 cohort. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Academic progress check-in meeting between teachers and students during and/or after each marking period Students Professional Development Committee. Each term will have 3-4 meetings Teachers Department Meetings during Monday PDs Faculty i.e Math/Science/Humanities/SPED/ENL Specialized special educators and ENL teachers will join in on the department meetings of the content they teach the most. There will be a rotation to ensure specific subject areas have the opportunity to meet. Intra-visitations. Teachers will sign up for one intra-visitation the first term and two intra-visitations the second term, targeting a specific domain on the Danielson framework for Teaching. Teachers will engage in a pre-observation meeting, intra-visitation session, followed by a debrief. These will be targeted for strengths/weaknesses and learning goals through the Danielson framework for Teaching. Sept 2018 through June 2019 Sept 2018 through June 2019 Sept 2018 to June 2019 Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, 4 Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Department Heads, Teachers Teachers Sept 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers Course map for 4 year high school taking credit accumulation into account. This has already been pre-designed through the DOE. It will be made visible in classrooms and to students. This includes maps for subgroups such as ENLs, SPEDs, and IB students. Teachers Data analysis on attendance, credit accumulation, marking period scholarship report, lateness, parent outreach, graduation rate through specific committees. Teachers; Guidance Staff We will provide workshops for parents on providing home-based support and strategies to improve student achievement. Parents and students Principal, Assistant Principal, 6 Staff members Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance, Teachers, Community Associate, Parent Coordinator Teachers and ENACT December 2018 through May 2019 October 2018 through June 2019 October 2018 through June 2019 3  IB students will pass 75% of their IB courses with at least an 80 and increase the completion of the full IB Diploma Programme by 3%. IB teachers, students and parents IB Coordinator, Assistant Principal, Principal October 2018 through June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. September - Orientation for Parents. Parent & Teacher bonding trip to allow connections made between teachers and parents. School will explain and motivate parents during curriculum night and PTA meetings to engage meaningfully in the teacher-parent expectation of collaboration to ensure timely and effective support to students. Monthly “Student of the Month” celebrations – Mr. Elmaliki October - PTA. Freshmen BBQ for bonding November - PC and PTA - International Food and Culture Festival December – PC and PTA - Holiday Gathering January - PC and Teachers - Honor Roll for Semester 1 (Brunch) February – PTA, GC and Students - Valentine’s dance March - Women’s International Day (March 8th) - PC and GC - Mothers or female guardians come to school and have brunch with daughter/son. April - Men’s day - Principal and PC - Fathers come to the school and sit in class with their child. Also, brunch is provided. May – Principal and PC - Mother’s Day celebration - June - Ms. DaCosta, PC and PTA - End of the school year BBQ to celebrate student achievements. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Teacher and counselor goals will be created as a result of small group or individual meetings and revised 2. during mid-year planning conferences held by February 2019. Intra-visitation form and log will be shared with staff and transparent to the entire school community. Staff will have the chance to highlight their strengths, and schedule for intra-visitations and feedback to happen. 3. Online system of calendar meetings, agendas, and dates will be maintained in Google drive. 4. Student input and selection in electives being offered and transcript review meetings with course requests 4  5. Course map creation for school 4 year plan, including subgroup scheduling for ENLs, SPEDs, and IB students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, each committee will have the agenda and corresponding minutes for at least 4 departments meetings. There will be 1 logged intra-visitation that will have occurred for each teacher. By February 2019, and then June 2019, counselors and selected staff will have gathered, analyzed, and shared the credit accumulation data on first and second semester student results as per the New Visions student sorter. Information to be updated before the January 2019 Regents period and then before the June 2018 Regents period for the corresponding data analysis. Scheduled meeting to plan and prepare for teacher-led professional collaborations with administration. Guidance team will monitor graduating cohort closely to ensure timely graduation. Meetings with coordinators regarding the gathering of resources to support progress of goal-meeting. Documentation of intra-visitations through Google drive. Freshman orientation to explain graduation requirements, school policies and high school expectations both in English and Arabic. Any new student who enters after September will be expected to attend another session in January and May. Students will be expected to sign a contract and this will be uploaded onto Google Drive as a reference with parent information listed. Our midpoint benchmark to indicate school progress towards meeting our goals is evidence of teacher collaboration through cross-curricular academic vocabulary, strategies, and resources being used. Furthermore, the teachers would be making progress as per their observation ratings on the learning goal they have selected to improve upon through the support of their colleagues. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. New Visions “Data Portal” and Strategic Data Check-in (SDC) meetings. Minutes of professional development committee meetings and department meetings as well as documentation of intra-visitations in Google classroom. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. - Based on the School Quality Snapshot for the last two years and the NYC School Survey for the same period the school has been showing slow but steady growth in each of the six areas of the framework. The element of trust has been a particular high mark in terms of the school leadership relationship with all school constituencies. - Continue to encourage and facilitate venues for distributed leadership as evidenced by department chairs, SLT, and professional assignments - Continue modeling diverse ways in which to present or facilitate professional development - Budget strategically to provide opportunities for teachers' professional advancement - Looking at student work data with cabinet, departments and cross subject teachers - Continued review of needs assessment such as the decrease in credit accumulation from grade 10 to grade 11, and the tendency of our juniors and seniors to cut classes vs freshmen and sophomores. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the Principal and Assistant Principal will use Advance observations to provide quality feedback to teachers, resulting in at least 90% of teachers receiving an MOTP score with a .5% to 2% increase. This will be measured by monthly review of Advance teacher data. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Focused walkthroughs three times a semester with a specific Danielson Framework focus Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers 9/18 - 6/19 Principal, Assistant Initial Planning Conferences - Mid-year Planning Conferences - End-of-Year Planning Conferences. Teachers and Staff Teachers will create, discuss and submit goals (Learning Development Plans) during the IPCs. SLT check-ins quarterly. Principal/AP will report about progress in Advance documentation, and quality of instructional practice and student outcomes. Teachers and Staff PLC evaluation meetings quarterly for professional development trainings occurring. For example, syllabi creation, writing standards-based curriculum maps, providing students with differentiated performance tasks and student-created rubrics, etc. Teachers and Staff Fall 2018, February 2019 and June 2019 Fall 2018, February 2019 and June 2019 Fall 2018, February 2019 and June 2019 Principal, Danielson's Element Expert Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Other Staff SLT Members Professional Learning Committee The Professional Development Committee will collaboratively work to ensure PDs are meeting the needs of the students. Teachers and Staff 9/18 - 6/19 PD Committee 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The staff members of the School Leadership Team (SLT) will report monthly on what professional development (PD) sessions took place since the last SLT meeting. Administrative members of the SLT will explain the observation process to the SLT and report on progress of classroom observations. Parents will be encouraged to express their ideas for PD needs and topics. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 7  - Principal and Assistant Principal will facilitate three meetings where performance tasks and student work will be analyzed and examined. - Principal, Assistant Principal, and selected teachers will review periodic assessment data. - Review of teachers’ lesson plans and quarterly data analysis. - Teacher ideas about PD needs will be discussed at PD Committee meetings. Teachers will lead PD on a variety of topics generated from these discussions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 90% of teachers will have at least 50% of their observations completed and entered in the Advance system. Also 80% will have a rating of effective or highly effective in at least one of the three components of Danielson's domain 3. Initial planning conferences will be facilitated for all staff by Principal by October 31, 2018. Mid-year planning conferences will be facilitated for all staff by Principal and Assistant Principal by 3/01/19. End of year conferences will be facilitated for all staff by Principal and Assistant Principal by 6/08/19. Monitoring and analyzing of number of observations and feedback provided by Principal and Assistant Principal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance MOTP online tools, Advance written observations, and individual review and feedback conversations. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Areas of celebration: Enact, our on-site COB, facilitates parent-choice workshops after school and periodically during PTA meetings (QR) Outreach to families from teachers and other staff members regarding students' academic and socio-emotional progress, as evident by school communication log (Google drive) An Arab American Family Support Center grant program (COMPASS) will be on site for two full days per week, addressing the socio-emotional needs of our new 9 and 10 graders and supporting our college preparedness efforts. Mom’s and Dad’s day-Inviting parents/guardians to have breakfast and visit classrooms and learn about the school. They were also encouraged to sign up for the PTA. Weekly emails generated as outreach for students with at risk attendance. Increased communication through Pupil path and KGIA school accounts. Increased community involvement through service projects i.e. One15 Sailing club, Brooklyn district attorney’s office Healthy Relationships Workshops facilitated by AAFSC. Life Skills Workshops from Bridging Access to Care. College and Career prep workshops through Bell Curves. International food & culture festival. Honor roll celebration during each term. Focus: Streamlining communication through IO Classroom and KGIA school domain (internal school assessment) Expanding on the selection of workshops and school events to increase parental attendance to school meetings and events (internal school assessment) 9  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will continue to develop a more collaborative partnership with families and community organizations, supporting students' socio-emotional development. It will be measured by a 5% increase in attendance to parent-teacher conferences and school-based workshops, in addition to a 3% increase in student attendance and punctuality. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Facilitation of workshops tailored to parent interest, including orientation to IO Classroom and PupilPath Parents 10/18 - 5/19 Parent Coordinator, Enact Social Worker, Guidance Counselors, Teachers Attendance at school-held workshops and parent-teacher conferences Parents 9/18 - 6/19 Principal, Parent Coordinator Phone communication log and Tuesdays parent outreach Parents 9/18 - 6/19 Parent Coordinator, Yearly calendar with key dates and events developed by parent coordinator in collaboration with Principal and PTA Monthly calendar, facilitated by parent coordinator and posted online and on Google calendar by the technology coordinator. SLT will create an action plan and calendar dates for specific improvement plans aligned with doe school survey results. Quarterly newsletter Attendance team has weekly meetings to discuss outreach and incentives. At risk students have a point person to monitor attendance, make outreach, provide incentives and have intervention meetings. Weekly emails go out to parents when their child is absent or late more than twice in a previous week. Technology coordinator will update school website as needed. Parents, teachers and students Parents, teachers and students Parents, teachers and students Staff, Teachers 9/18 - 6/19 Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Technology Coordinator 10/18 - 4/19 SLT Members 9/18 - 6/19 Parent Coordinator, Newsletter coordinator, PTA and Staff Parents, Students 9/18 - 6/19 Assistant Principal, Attendance team Parents, teachers and students 9/18 – 6/19 Technology coordinator and Parent coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 1  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. ENACT Inc., Arab American Family Support Center, Ignite COMPASS from AAFSC, NYU College Advising Corps through the College Access for All initiative. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Communication resources include PupilPath, Google domain, Phone Messenger, school website, school FB page, PTA FB page Parent coordinator communication logs and attendance outreach logs Regular parent coordinator submission of family attendance data analyzed at the end of each term Facilitation of workshops and partnerships from our partner organization, the Arab American Family Support Center, our on site COB, Enact Inc, and other guests such as the NYPD Youth Division and the Mayor's Office of Immigrant Affairs. Monthly PTA meetings on Saturdays. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By November 2018 and throughout each marking period, student attendance data will be reviewed, analyzed and discussed with Staff, parents and students. By December 2018, the Principal, Assistant Principal, and SLT members would have analyzed and narrated the survey results data. By January 2019, family attendance data analysis will be shared with school community regarding events to date. 2  By January 2019, scholarship reports will be reviewed and discussed with Staff, parents and students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent coordinator logs, minutes of PTA and SLT meetings and attendance records of parent workshops; parent-teacher DOE conferences; New Visions Data Portal and ATS data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 20% to 50% less credits earned than the attempted Class attendance ranging from 70%to 90% Failure to pass a humanities-based Regents 20% to 50% less credits earned than the attempted Class attendance ranging from 70% to 90% Failure to pass a math Regents exam by the end of their sophomore year 20% to 50% less credits earned than the attempted Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Pull-out or push-in program for accommodations; Before and after school program; Saturday Academy; Inter-disciplinary and inter-grade planning; AIS courses embedded in the school day aligned to the core curriculum; additional writing or study skills courses provided as part of the school day Pull-out or push-in program for accommodations; Homework Help; Test Prep; Saturday Academy; Inter-disciplinary and inter-grade planning; implementation of a2i program to drive curriculum; math resources purchased to support differentiated instruction Pull-out or push-in program for accommodations; Homework Help; Test Prep; Saturday Small group instruction; one-on-one tutoring; tailored class size of25 or less students During school day, after-school (Wednesday through Friday) and Saturday mornings. After school and Saturday programs run from October 2018 through June 2019. Small group instruction; 1 year or 2 year pacing of course identified by student progress; foundational course prior to students beginning a sequence for the following school year planned; ESL and ICTpush-in services During school day, after-school (Wednesday through Friday) and Saturday mornings. After school and Saturday programs run from October 2018 through June 2019. Small group instruction; peer tutoring; advisory support; foundational course During school day, after-school (Wednesday through 4  Class attendance ranging from 70% to 90% Academy; Inter-disciplinary and inter-grade planning for vocabulary introduction prior to students beginning a sequence Friday) and Saturday mornings. After school and Saturday programs run from October 2018 through June 2019. Failure to pass a science Regents science exam by end of their sophomore year Failure to pass a second Regents by end of their junior year Analysis of Regents, with particular focus on the writing portions of the exam Looking at demographics regarding student subgroups; SWD, ENL, etc. End of course sequence results compared to Regents; especially 4 credits needed to be promoted to junior year Below 80% attendance during any school month Lack of necessary credit accumulation after each semester Failing more than 3 classes in a semester Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Small group instruction AIS class embedded into program, specifically for students who have almost passed the sequence of classes and need support passing the Regents exam During school day, after-school (Wednesday through Friday) and Saturday mornings. After school and Saturday programs run from October 2018 through June 2019. Small groups; one-to-one. During school day, especially during lunch outreach times, and after-school. Pull-out or push-in program for accommodations; Homework Help; Test Prep; Saturday Academy; Inter-disciplinary and inter-grade planning Humanities combination classes with focus on writing, using elements of the core curriculum Small group sessions; one on one conferences; meeting groups; goal setting for academics and behavior; team-building activities; college and career readiness meetings. 5  Not passing at least 1 -2 Regents during each school year Off track for CCR Frequent anecdotals in PupilPath for behavior or socio-emotional support needed 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently we have 7 students: 4 doubled up and 3 in City shelters. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. STH students are monitored by guidance personnel and the parent coordinator all throughout the year for socio-emotional support, food and clothes and referral to our CBOs, either the Arab American Family Support Center or ENACT, and our Food Pantry sponsored by the NYC Food Bank, for additional services or entitlements. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. KGIA teachers are currently highly qualified. To attract additional HQT we will continue to: Meet as a hiring committee, including student presence, to finalize hiring choices. Conduct a rigorous interview process which includes providing lesson plans, facilitating demonstration lessons, and checking references. Attend DOE city-wide, Affinity group and New Visions hiring fairs. Post vacancies in college and university websites and partnering organizations such as Teach for America. Once we hire highly qualified personnel we engage in meaningful learning plans (goal setting) conversations with teachers to make sure they continue to develop professionally. We are also very strategic about using teachers talents or other experiences to enhance their leadership skills while expanding the elective choices for the students. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Offer and/or facilitate continuous professional development on the Danielson Framework for Teaching, the Capacity Framework, and the NGSS to ensure professional growth and effective teaching practices. The PLC (Professional Learning Committee) will meet to decide on a cyclical professional development topics. Besides regular observations followed by timely feedback and opportunities for common planning to enhance and align curriculum, teachers are given venues for inter-visitations with the purpose of learning and/or sharing best practices followed by debriefings and follow up. We are working on creating an assessment calendar with department chairpersons so we have a continuous assessment cycle that is used to inform instruction. We only have one paraprofessional who attends all faculty meetings and benefits from the same PDs as teachers. Part 3: TA Schools Only 9  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The school created the MOSL committee back in June 2014. Since then we have met every year to make final decisions for MOSL considering our student data and recommendations from all teachers. Teachers and administrators utilize the New Visions for Public Schools Data Portal to determine and evaluate learning outcomes, identifying and assisting all students’ subgroups. We have Mock Regents twice per year. The New Visions tool is very helpful in analyzing this data and assisting teachers in providing targeted instruction before the actual Regents in January and June. Departments design and utilize various forms of assessment appropriate to their disciplines. This include but is not limited to practice science labs, mock Regents, Google forms to create Regents-style multiple choice quizzes that provide immediate feedback, exit tickets, performance based assessments and regular verbal or written feedback on progress. IB teachers meet bi-monthly to norm grading of IAs and EAs, review IB rubrics and marking schemes, and sharing model assessments. Administrators use Advance observation feedback to identify needs and differentiate PD to assist teachers in developing, utilizing and analyzing effective assessment practices 0  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 200,247 0 13,006 0 2,403,189 X N/A X N/A X Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5C 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. 1  Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Khalil Gibran International Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Khalil Gibran International Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 3  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of our Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The topics of these workshops are being decided at this time (see below suggested topics) in connection with the two CBOs on site: ENACT, Inc and The Arab American Family Support Center (AAFSC). The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services - This one was actually covered on 10/22/16 when the AAFSC presented about all of their great community services and the Mayor's Office of Immigrant Affairs shared about their services as well -; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, graduation requirements, IB guidelines and expectations, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before October 31st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 4  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Khalil Gibran International Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 5  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to October 31st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved (For the academic year 2018-2019 that meeting will be scheduled by October 31, 2018.) ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; 6  ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences. Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. Parent/guardian responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television, plays video games and spends time on social media; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; 7  ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time and prepared; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● be assertive about my own learning by asking for help when needed; ● always try my best to learn. Strategies from the action plans designed to increase parent involvement, engagement and education: Deliver Parent Academic Success workshops to clarify student challenges regarding management of assignments and workload to improve academic outcomes. Parents will participate in college tours and college presentations in school. Teachers will share IO Classroom anecdotals with parents to relay any student feedback. 8  Results of monitoring progress of overall students performance will be share with parents in the Spring 2018. Teachers will share IO Classroom anecdotals with parents in order to provide feedback to parents and share vital information about student progress. Schedule meetings with parents and students at critical points throughout the academic year, specifically at the end of sophomore year, fall of junior year, and end of junior year in order to review and assess their college-readiness. 9 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: Currently our school has 230 students, 38% of whom are English language learners of entering to expanding level. We will use funding from this program to provide students with supplemental academic after-school programs throughout the 2018-2019 school year. This program will involve direct academic language instruction in the style of a stand-alone ENL class as well as homework help in content areas. The usefulness of this program is evident from analyzing ELLs' Regents scores and credit accumulation and comparing it to NYSESLAT results, which shows that many students are making far greater progress in their basic interpersonal communication skills than their academic language. The rationale is further that some ELL students who receive ICT services during the day are often unable to receive targeted language support as well as support for learning disabilities during the regular school day; this after school program will allow these students to receive additional support. Students served will be of all grade levels, depending on the day they attend the program. It will take place throughout the 2018-2019 school year beginning in late October/early November and ending right before June Regents week. We will also provide targeted instruction for ELLs through our bi-monthly Saturday Academy program tailored specifically for our students who are taking Regents exams in January and/or June. This program will also extend to include specific content-based homework help for interested ELLs. Our program will be focused on improving students' skill set with academic vocabulary, writing grammatically-correct essays that elaborate on claims using valid textual evidence, and improving their reading comprehension skills by enhancing their presentation and collaboration skills. Instruction will be provided by a consistent ENL teacher and a rotating schedule of content-area teachers in the same room (flexible groupings style). This will provide a maximum student-teacher ratio of 10:1. Home language support is provided by two content-area bilingual teachers in the subject areas of Math and ELA. These teachers will provide oral translations of important academic vocabulary, mimicking Regents testing accommodations and enabling the students to complete their work in the language of instruction, English. Supplemental materials may be provided on a case-by-case basis, including Apex ENL courses, Quizlet, and other online resources, but typically teachers will support students using the materials provided in classes. Parents will be informed through permission slips and flyers translated into their home language and will be kept updated through PTC and Pupil Path anecdotals as needed. Student attendance will be maintained on the New Visions Data Portal. In summary, ENL and ELA teachers of immigrant students will provide direct instructional support to students during after-school and Saturday Academy. The programs will go until early June and will support students in passing the NYSESLAT and Regents for ELA, Algebra I, and Geometry. Programs after-school will occur on Tuesday through Friday, from 3:10 PM to 4:30 PM. Saturday Academy programs will go from 9 AM to 1 PM. Students will be supported through data-driven collaborations where they are grouped according to NYSESLAT Scores and grade level. The instruction will be provided in English by certified ENL/bilingual or content-teachers. We will utilize Prentice Hall workbooks, as well as teacher-generated resources to provide supplemental support. 1  rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: Teachers working in the program will receive ongoing PD provided by our school staff during the after school PD meetings on Mondays and Tuesdays. Our school needs specific professional development on making learning accessible to all ELLs. Some topics that we would like to incorporate in our professional collaboration program include: providing instructive and constructive feedback to reinforce student understanding, facilitating Accountable talk amongst ELLs where they are active participants in class discussion, sharing strategies for improving writing skills to ensure that students' explicit thinking is evident in their writing, and provide support around the consistent use of academic vocabulary through multiple content-areas. The PD sessions will also include identification of ELLs who need extra support, explanation of different levels of proficiency, as well as discussion of how to scaffold for different levels of ELLs in order to make academic gains. This will allow teachers to use data to facilitate student progress. These trainings will be specific to the needs of the teachers as they progress with teaching our learners. Teachers who collaboratively teach content-classes with ELLs will meet once or twice a month throughout the school year. This will be at no cost to the Title III program. The providers for the trainings will be the ENL teachers with content teachers being co-facilitators when sharing effective pedagogical strategies. The teachers will turnkey information provided at PD sessions given by the Affinity Filed Support Center (C060 - Working group series - 10/23/18 thru 3/20/19) and other NYC DOE programs, such as the LEAP Office of Leadership on 10/4/18, as well as observations gathered from visitations of other schools with high populations of ELLs. These visits will be scheduled with the support of the Affinity Field Support Center ELL Team. Additional information requested will be provided once the professional learning committee meets to outline the professional development calendar and topics for the year. Records of agendas and attendance sheets will be maintained by the Assistant Principal. The information will also be kept in a Google Drive folder maintained by ENL teachers in order to keep staff members up to date. More specifically, the school will host three professional development collaborative planning sessions for teachers serving this particular subgroup. The first meeting will occur prior to the initiation of the program. The teachers will meet to set instructional goals for the program, identify the specific resources that will be utilized, and identify interim benchmarks for support. The second meeting will occur in January, during the professional development day. Teachers will measure the instructional progress that their students are making and identify interventions that are needed to support academic growth. With the administration of practice Regents, tailored support will be provided to ensure that students are meeting the standards of specific content material. Teachers will also have the opportunity to use the DELLSS website to identify resources for student support. Another meeting will occur at the end of the program, after Regents administration, to identify student successes with meeting the instructional expectations as evident by their Regents score. 2  rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: We would like to increase the number of workshops that we provide for the families of our ELL students. Needs analysis indicated that parents of ELLs are less likely to attend general parent events, demonstrating that we should strengthen our parent outreach. In collaboration with the Arab American Family Support Center, our lead partner, we will be working on communicating to families the importance of school work. We hope through clear and consistent communication families will work to provide their children with a home environment that is conducive to studying. We want to invite families to join us during our Homework Help sessions where we could model for them how they can assist their children in studying, even if they are not proficient in English. We are planning on hosting instructional segments during our PTA meetings where parent activities will focus on building adult literacy and technology needs. During our phone calls surveying parents about how we could best communicate with them we will also inquire about what additional workshops they would like to see in school. We will add a communication component regarding the importance of attendance. School Messenger will also relay important message in families' native language, if needed. Some potential topics for discussion include: · · · · How to best support student English language acquisition How to best support students for general academic gains The importance of attendance at school and after school events Accessing data about student progress through Pupil Path (IO Classroom platform) Translation services will be provided by our bilingual guidance counselor and/or bilingual parent coordinator, depending on the topic. Translations of communications will be done by DOE translation services. The workshops will take place in November, January, March, and June, and will be scheduled for approximately an hour each time. Records of parent attendance will be kept by the Parent Coordinator for each of these meetings. In addition, our ENL department will host two meetings to introduce ENL and TBE services (and/or to provide a refresher course) at our school to the parents. Both meetings will be aligned to the parent-teacher conference model and will be instructionally based. Our teachers will be the providers for these meetings. They will share content-specific information about curriculum and our after-school program. They will also share with families instructional strategies that can support students at home with meeting school expectations for obtaining the necessary credits to be on track with graduation. How to best support student English language acquisition How to best support students for general academic gains The importance of attendance at school and after school events Accessing data about student progress through Pupil Path (IO Classroom platform) 3 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Supports one of our 3 ENL teachers salary. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 13,006 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Brooklyn District 15 School Name Khalil Gibran International Academy School Number 592 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Winston Hamann Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Karin Stinson Teacher/Subject Area Ilhem Chebout Teacher/Subject Area Misty Mitchell Related-Service Provider Superintendent Richard Cintron Assistant Principal Maria Huliaris Coach N/A School Counselor Gina Shedid Parent Ahmed Yahya Parent Coordinator Irene Moussa Field Support Center Staff Member Ana Vasquez Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 1 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 273 5 Total number of ELLs 102 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 37.36%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Arabic If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 25 0 25 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 25 0 0 0 0 0 25 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The formative assessments that are being used to evaluate understanding and acquisition of language and content are student-teacher conferences or small group discussions; cloze activities; the use of graphic organizers to structure note-taking, exit slips that check for understanding or information learned from a partner or the group; computer games like Kahoot, quizlet and structured essay/paragraph writing using exemplars, sentence prompts or fill-in-the blank. Supports/scaffolding is offered depending on the level of students. Finally, the ENL team also incorporated vocabulary review, speaking quizzes, peer assessments, and writing checklists. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Common planning, use of Google drive for shared documents allows the instructional methodologies and foci to be aligned, repeated and reinforced. Consistency of routines and means of unpacking information have allowed students to become more at ease with making sense of new material, vocabulary, and content. 6  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The ENL team has commenced using the same format for writing exercises so that the need for supports can be accessed from one grade band to the other. Supports for each level of ENL learner is embedded in the writing tasks, so that each student is able to attempt the baseline/benchmark assessments. The team has also incorporated speaking quizzes as a means to assess students' ability to formulate their own questions, to ask provided questions, to construct their own questions using sentence stems, and to respond them as well. In fact, the 10th-11th graders also used sentence stems to generate their own questions and prepared answers as a mean to engage in accountable-talk discussions as a summative assessment at the end of each unit as well. In addition, the ENL team and integrated teaching partners continue to evaluate the RLAT, the EDAT tool, the New Visions Data Portal, and marking period grades at the end of units, at the end of the marking period and at the end of the term to make informed decisions about how to adjust the lesson plans, how to modify their scope-and sequence of units, how to tailor the performance tasks in order to help the students demonstrate their deeper understanding of NGSS and state standard-aligned curricula successfully, with greater ease, with greater expertise or with more autonomy or independence as the year transpires. The data analysis of performance tasks, summative and baseline assessments also informs grouping of students and programming. Teachers share their data analyses with administrators a minimum of two times per semester, and guidance counselors and the attendance team, as well, analyze the data and to make informed decisions for programming and individualized student support with the support of the ENL providers. Looking at both Regents passing rates and credit accumulation, we have made modifications to our instructional program to include three ENL-certified teachers to meet the academic needs of our 102 ESL students. We also work to ensure that at least 95% of our students are in compliance, so they have an opportunity to take classes that align to the CCSS ELA and history standards. Finally, we have been successful with attendance for after-school enrichment programs that are modified to meet their academic needs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ENL team members and the ELA teacher who has worked with these pedagogues attended a series of professional development conferences geared toward unfolding instruction in the Integrated ELA classroom during the 2017-2018 academic year. Two of our teachers have attended the Integrated ELA Institute and one of our teachers has attended the ELL Summer Institute that has led to the use of similar reading and writing strategies as well as these different classes mirroring strategies to discuss content, to have students work in groups to clarify, to make meaning of information and to correct misconceptions as well as to synthesize information. This year, one of the ENL teachers attended a professional development that covered resources for SIFE students; summative assessments for math and science, as well as the exams that students took in their Native Arabic Language have made it clear that there is a need for a literacy screener. For the 2018-2019 academic year, the school plans to make use of a screener available through the department of education portal, so that the ENL team has a better indication of home language skills in literacy and math. This resource will allow the school to handle interventions by means of more informed programming, grouping, and developing a bridge program for Entering level English speakers with lower literacy skills. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not applicable to KGIA. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores reveal that a little more than 40% of the ELLs at KGIA enter the school community at the entering or emerging level. The scores for writing also reveal that many of the lower-level ELLs are lacking basic phonemic skills, and that trait remains with them even when they begin to command English as a New Language at more proficient levels. As a result, the writing modality will continue to be the target area of gain for a majority of the ELLs, especially for Students who continue to place at the transitioning and expanding levels, and those who struggle with near-passing scores for Regents exams. The NYSESLAT scores also reveal that many of the students with higher scores of expanding or transitioning 7  have decent scores in speaking and listening modalities; showcasing that they do have stronger communication skills. The goal this year is to continue to develop the skill of close reading and analytical and expository writing. This will enable students to make progress in the writing modality, yet even more importantly, to make gains in organizing their writing when identifying evidence and explaining it across disciplines. The team has also used feedback and review of student work to identify this need: students need to write 2 sentences for the analysis of textual evidence. So, as a result, the team has decided to construct universal writing frameworks for text analysis and for the argument essay. In this manner, as students move from one teacher's class to another, as they move from one grade to another, how to handle the writing task is the same. Additionally, as they move from one grade to another, they can learn how to be more autonomous and the cohesive structure that they follow in the framework is something that they can internalize, so the need for support is less and less. Using the same writing framework makes it easier to push the students give more, an additional sentence, for analysis as they will already know what the level of expectation is for a paragraph that is well-executed structurally and analytically. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Regular ENL team meetings and co-planning sessions including ENL and subject area teachers, as well as periodic reporting meetings to the entire staff. Again, the use of shared Google classrooms, and constant communication of “glows and grows” for all units that the team teaches. Finally, the team has also decided to work with a pacing calendar to foster the development of skills. For example, the transitional 11th grade ENL class with work on argument essay while the 11th integrated ELA class will do the same type of essay, yet the texts and subject will be different. Otherwise, if the students need to practice both types of texts, the ENL class will work on text response, and the standalone will work on argument essay. The use of Kahoot and surveys that ask students to wrap-up and reflect on their understanding of units and the accompanying key details, themes, domain-specific vocabulary or terms guides what needs to be reinforced for the units that follow. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. KGIA expanded to 3 ENL teachers since last year. We have used several programming techniques to meet students' instructional needs, and simultaneously to be in compliance with the mandated minutes and scheduling requirements. Most ENL students, regardless of level, receive a standalone ENL class, taught by an ENL certified educator, more than what is required. We are looking to expand our current level I (EES81-82QE) and level III ENL courses (EES83-84QE) to include level II course as well. Currently, we are providing heterogeneous classes which either comprise students of one or two grade bands. This programming decision has been made in part due to the fact that we have students spanning across all levels for each grade with dissimilar course requests. In addition to the standalone classes, our ENL teachers co-teach with ELA teachers at every grade level with 2 sections at the 9th and 10th grade levels.There is only one section of Integrated ELA at the 11th and 12th Grade level respectively. These sections of ELA are 95% homogeneous. Our teachers also push into both global history classes and an earth science class depending on their need to fulfill the recommended minutes of instruction by a provider and depending on what is best for their academic success in light of credit accrual or potential for passing a Regent exam. These classes are 90% homogeneous. b. TBE program. If applicable. We were chosen to begin a TBE program in the Fall of 2017 because of our significant number of native Arabic-speaking students. As part of this program, we have a TBE Program for English Language Learners who speak Arabic as 8  well as Free Standing ENL courses since Transitional Bilingual Education has been proven to help students develop English proficiency faster than the Standalone ENL Program. KGIA Transitional Bilingual Education Program in Arabic is a highly distinguished program that utilizes Arabic as a native language as well as English as a second language to help English Language Learners excel both academically and socially. Despite the fact that KGIA TBE in Arabic started in September, 2017, it has proved to be the most successful program that assisted all ELLs to promote their performance in both Arabic and English, allowing for a smoother transfer of literacy skills from Arabic to English. KGIA TBE allowed ELLs the opportunity to enhance their performance in the acquisition of English as a new language. The dual language text books that are exclusively utilized in KGIA TBE Program made the program very effective in addressing the needs of ELLs in all modalities. Not only does KGIA TBE Program help students promote their academic performance in State Standardized Exams but authenticity in everyday real-life situations. c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable to KGIA. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All students receive standalone ENL who have been identified as entering, emerging level-learners. Many of the low-level transitioning level students also have a standalone to make more gains in all of their classes, and the higher-level transitioning level students have a standalone ENL class in order to propel them to place at the commanding level and to raise their academic potential. ESL teachers then push-in to content area classes to provide integrated English as a native language support. This semester the classes that are supported through integrated ENL include: algebra, earth science ELA, and both global history I/II and global history III/IV. Most students receive at least 30 to 50% more than the minimum minutes required. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All content-area classes using the NYS CCSS as the basis for the instruction provided to students in English. We use various UDL strategies to reach our ELLs during class. For example, students receive support through technology and software programs they use to translate information or communicate with the teachers who are not fluent in the students' native language. After receiving in-house training, staff also started using Google Classroom to post lessons and to increase written communication amongst students as well as student accountability and self-reliance. DDC training is also provided so that pedagogues are able to analyze data results and provide students with individualized or group instruction. Beginner students are seated with students who are slightly above level, thus ensuring their immersion into class lessons. When we use more advanced methodologies, such as philosophical chairs, accountable talk or Socratic seminar, students are asked to reiterate what a peer said if they are unable to answer a question on their own. They are also provided an alternative form of assessment: recording something that they heard, repeating a question they liked or recording how many times a student spoke. After some staff members received SIOP and training three years ago, and the rest of the staff had that learning shared with them, departments began to implement these strategies in their classrooms: identifying causes and effects, implementing questioning techniques, using visuals/media to make content more comprehensible and front loading key vocabulary. Finally, more importantly, many pedagogues have a better sense of the significance of revisiting key details and vocabulary once covered and connecting that information to more current lessons. Moreover, the ESL teacher and history teachers attended training for using specific strategies to help students increase their reading comprehension and familiarity with academic vocabulary. Finally, the ELL department has been consistent with their offer to always help share their time with pedagogues to review lesson plans so that they can offer strategies or scaffolds that can be used in order to make information more comprehensible for learners. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 9  Most of our ENL students are fluent in Arabic. The students who are fluent in Bengali, Serbo-Croatian, Spanish and Urdu are encouraged to take notes and translate complex ideas or key vocabulary words in their respective native languages. For the students who are fluent in Arabic, they, too, are urged to translate key ideas into Arabic. Additionally, with the TBE program the home language is evaluated by means of the LOTE exam. In the ANL classes (Arabic as a Native Language), students are evaluated on their discussion and questioning techniques, their writing and presentations. In addition, in the Bilingual Arabic TBE class, all is explained in both English and Arabic, yet students are allowed to answer short responses that need writing in Arabic. This accommodation is allowed on the Regents as well. However, KGIA staff members do measure these students' progress in meeting the CCSS standards, and use assessments after each unit of study to ensure that they are improving their reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills in ENL, as well as across all content-areas where they are receiving integrated instruction. Finally, when it is not possible for content-area teachers to evaluate students in their home languages, once again, the use of Kahoot and surveys that ask students to wrap-up and reflect on their understanding of units, key details, themes, domain-specific vocabulary or terms. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is differentiated for all students, regardless of their ELL designated subgroup. In particular, we ensure that we use technology to make the material accessible to students from multiple access points. We strategically group students in the classroom, ensuring that their partners support the collaboration process for demonstrating understanding. Students co-create the assessment rubrics, and have a choice as to how they demonstrate their understanding of an individual assignment or a performance task. The school is in the process of developing a program to assess students’ home language literacy and academic strength to apply to differentiated programming, particularly for entering 9th graders in the 2018-2019 academic year. We plan on addressing SIFE and entering-level English speakers through targeted literacy instruction addressing grade-level concepts and questions with course materials appropriate for their language level. We are also being more mindful of giving students testing accommodations for all exams taken in school as well as mock Regents and the actual Regents exams that they must sit for in January or in June. Finally, there is a lot of thought given to the programming of former ELLs, so that they are placed in classes, specifically ENL and science, which will promote the development of their academic skills. If there are no service providers available for the classes the Former ELLs are programmed for, an ENL service provider offers an English course designed to develop their particular needs: grammar, research, argument essay or whatever their personal ask is. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We have used the Frayer Model to help ELLs improve their academic vocabulary, and annotation skills to improve the reading comprehension of non-fiction material, especially in humanities-based courses. English and science classes are also expanding to include a more systemic approach to daily accountable talk, and a weekly or monthly discussion using a formal approach such as the Socratic Seminar, Paideia, or speaking quizzes or philosophical chairs. The ENL team has also decided to use the same teaching strategies like fact vs. opinion, cause vs. effect, cloze activities for vocabulary, visualization of vocabulary, the three-reads protocol, who-what-where-why-and how activities and routine procedures for the unfolding of instruction to lower the affective filter for students, to make the process of unpacking of information so familiar to them, that accessing the content is easier. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? KGIA inhabits an inclusive learning environment, where all student input is valued and supported through tangible scheduled means. Given our small school size, we work arduously to provide the students with the differentiation needed for them to be successful in the classroom. ENL and SPED teachers work together to not only co-create students IEPs, but also identify the UDL strategies that will be used to help students attain their goals. We work hard to program two teachers in our ICT classes 0  and to program ENL teachers to support GE classes with a significant number of ENL students to support them in content-areas. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Teachers are responsible for making all material accessible to students. They work on implementing the necessary differentiation strategies and tailor instruction by creating strategic groups for each class, as evidence by pre- and post- assessments for each unit of study. In addition, students have a strong influence over how teachers adjust assignments to demonstrate understanding of the content. Many of the ENL teachers, for example, will offer two or three forms of differentiation for tasks. All teachers use these forms of differentiation: visuals, translation of information, use of dictionaries, varied response tasks or the number of questions answered, different performance tasks, or the number of scaffolds used to help students comprehend content. The intervention services that the school offers to make this possible include: after-school programs, SAT support through Kaplan, Saturday Academy from November through May, and small group tutoring during lunch. The school also offers a summer enrichment program for a select number of students who are committed to attending with no more than 2 absences. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? New programs or improvements that we are considering for the next semester and the upcoming school year include Integrated ELA classes in the morning and ENL instruction being provided for all students in the later morning/afternoon within a small class setting that does not exceed 25 students. We would like to streamline the programs for our ENL teachers, having them become experts at pushing-in to one or two content areas. This will help the pedagogues develop stronger visions for how to unfold instruction for the ELLs, how to better identify where supports are needed, and where all elements of curriculum designed can be structured with ELL strategies so that ELLs can learn the information more easily. Streamlining programs for the ENL teachers will allow them, therefore, to build strong partnerships with their co-teachers, so that there is strategic implementation of department-wide strategies that will help students meet the standards within specific content areas. We would also provide an after-school program where students receive tailored homework support in an area where the teacher has a specific expertise. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? This is our first year growing in terms of the programs and services that we are systemically providing for ENLs. Therefore, we will not be discontinuing any of the repeating classes and activities that we are offering. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students have equal access to all school programs. ESL students are receiving ENL support, regardless of level. They have the opportunity to participate in after-school programs and Saturday Academy, offered at the end of the term and prior to Regents exams. The two guidance counselors also work with the ELLs to familiarize them with the college opportunities they have available to them, and what they need in order to graduate and to be college and career-ready. The parent coordinator has an open door policy, and welcomes all ENLs in her office, especially during morning and after-school times. This provides the native Arabic speaking students a safe space to voice their concerns and share their successes with someone who speaks their native language. Additional academic intervention services that we provide students includes having a co-teacher in the content classes specified: algebra, Earth Science, global history I/II and III/IV, and ELA. By using integrated co-teacher, students are given the opportunity to learn in an inclusive learning environment that supports their language growth as they increasing and heightening their content knowledge, as aligned to the NGSS. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Differentiated instructional materials used to support ELLs and SWDs include Promethean boards, whiteboards; dry-erase markers; wipe-off sentence strips; laptops, iPads; manipulatives, PCs and differentiated books, as well as materials in native language such as CDs, magazines; leveled libraries and core curriculum textbooks. Students have also received literary texts translated in their native language, and dictionaries that they can use to translate information. One of their greatest assets 1  though is the use of the cell phone in the classroom; our cell phone policy has given the access to a lot more information and a tangible, meaningful way for them to apply it to their learning within seconds-especially with Kahoot or Quizlet assessment games or Google classroom participation. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Students are encouraged to use their home language to communicate with each other or to write their responses to critical thinking questions or essay prompts. If the teacher does not have knowledge of their home language, they translate the material in English using a software program. Other students also play a supportive role in translating information for entering students, thus giving students a forum to be successful in the class. Finally, with planning in advance, our Arabic-speaking staff can assist with reviewing glossaries devised especially for units so that the word-to-word translations are as accurate as possible/or directions are appropriately translated from Arabic to English. In the bilingual algebra TBE class, all information is explained in Arabic as a support before students engage in independent or group practice in English. Finally, in the TBE program, students are engaged in writing on a daily basis, and there is strong focus on discussion and questioning to help students develop their analytical and critical-thinking skills in Arabic in hopes that those skills are transferred to how they approach texts in other content-area classes. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ELLs comprise more than a third of our school population. They have not only immersed in our school community, but have actually been a defining characteristic of our school. All required and supplemental services and resources are provided to the ELLs. They are aligned to students' grade and level, and support their academic, social, and emotional growth. We program students individually and take into account emotional safety and the social environment they need in order to be successful. We are sensitive to their cultural needs, and ensure that they have a protective, supportive, and genuine environment so they grow holistically. A place for prayer is also provided so that the religious accommodation as per chancellor's regulation allows the students to feel comfortable as well. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Differentiated instructional materials used to support ELLs and SWDs include Promethean boards, whiteboards; dry-erase markers; wipe-off sentence strips; dictionaries; laptops; iPads; manipulatives, PCs and differentiated books, as well as materials in native language such as CDs, magazines; leveled libraries and core curriculum textbooks. Students have also received literary texts translated in their native language, and dictionaries that they can use to translate information. One of their greatest assets though is the use of the cell phone in the classroom; our cell phone policy has given the access to a lot more information and a tangible, meaningful way for them to apply it to their learning within seconds. During certain PDs, teachers share best practices and the methodologies they used that helped students make academic gains or have success in unit study. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). KGIA hosts a yearly Summer Institute prior to the school year starting for all newly enrolled students. ELLs are encouraged to participate in this event, and the school counselor and parent coordinator provide the translation services needed for them to understand school routines, services, and during general assemblies are provided in Arabic for the Arabic-speaking population as well as newsletters, flyers, PowerPoint presentations that discuss school events or scholastic information. We also host culturally-sensitive team building activities that are facilitated by the teachers and Principal. The Arab-American Family Support Center came to the school twice a week to provide social-emotional support, and through them, the Homework Help after-school program was funded to give academic assistance to our ELLs in need as well as students who were in need of academic support. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? For the last two years, KGIA has included French as the language offering through the IB program, in addition to Arabic. We are looking to expand our course offerings to include Apex. This form of blended learning will give ELLs the opportunity to 2  earn language electives. Since many of the ELLs come to us a either ninth or eleventh graders who are new to the US, they receive transfer language credits for the time they spent abroad. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? This does not apply to KGIA. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The PD plan is aligned with the CR Part 154, and with the needs of our staff. KGIA has a PD team comprised of content teachers, an ESL teacher, and a special education teacher to ensure a balanced approach to meeting the needs of our staff and the population they service. The PD team is creating an online survey for teachers. The survey is designed to help the PD team implement relevant professional development with respect to the preferences of our staff. The PD will take place throughout the school year, during our 155 minutes of after school. In addition, longer PD led by qualified ESL professionals will occur during days designated for PD throughout the school year. KGIA is working on increasing the ESL- specific PD for content teachers. Examples of this ESL-specific PD include (but are not limited to) SIOP, QTEL, and CAL. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We began and will continue to use effective co-teaching methodology in daily practice. Looking toward the future, we are working implementing an ESL freshman block whereby teachers have common-planning time built into their programs. We are also planning a freshmen orientation led by administration and teachers to help better prepare parents and students for the rigorous demands of high school culture. ENL staff attend professional development meetings to help support our students’ learning needs and to develop programming and instruction. Records are kept by having copies of agendas from the PD meeting copied and recorded by school support staff in the main office, and members of the ENL team keep the administration and staff current on new developments by regularly sharing information and materials in small group or individual meetings. Recent professional development meetings addressing student enrollment and Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE), for example, have prompted our staff to work on addressing the learning needs of that particular population (which is significantly represented in our ELL student body) and in using home language monitoring and assessment tools to identify student learning needs and adjust programming accordingly for the upcoming 2018-2019 school year. Another professional development discussed is “Advanced Literacies” or skills and strategies for absorbing information from a variety of texts and making meaning from them. 3  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ENL staff meets with parents on a case-by-case basis once per year in addition to parent-teacher conferences, open school orientations and individual meetings set after the end of a marking period as needed. The school uses the Pupil Path anecdotal system which parents are given access in September of every year. In addition we have a Google Drive-based system where teachers, school staff, and administrators keep records of any communication made with parents. For example, student outreach is allows all teachers to see what communications have been executed for every student in the building. This Google Drive document will be a required component of any parent communication for ENLs and non-ENLs, including in person meetings, phone calls, and individual letters. This will enable teachers to learn what previous parent outreach has taken place and document their own successful and unsuccessful attempts to speak to parents. This document will contain a specific entry field for ENL students that will allow ENL support staff to keep track of all parent communication with specific students and with the ENL parent population. Finally, the use of the New Visions portal enables all staff to see what credit deficiencies all students have as well as an outline of their academic goals with notes that are individualized guidelines that identify what they need to do to achieve their goals. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Workshops are being developed that are tailored towards ELL parent needs, so in this way, parents are familiar with ways to keep apprised of their children’s progress and so are able to communicate with the child’s teachers. Students will also have the opportunity (and encouragement) to invite parents to participate or to be present for in-class activities such as presentations. Finally, the school has had Dad's Day, Mom's Day and the Honor Roll celebrations where students are recognized for the work that they do in classrooms and parents can witness the gains their children are making across disciplines. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Khalil Gibran International Academy recognizes the academic and socio-emotional challenges of our population of ENLs. To accommodate and facilitate for our students, we offer various before school, after school, and Saturday school programs at the end of the term and before Regents. Further, there is also a summer ENL program offered for students who can commit to learning and being present for instruction with no less than 2 absences. Some examples include: ESL Beginners’ Writing, ENL History Support, ENL Science Support, Literacy and History, Saturday Literacy Academy, Math Homework Club, The Garden Club, ENACT and the Dance Performance Troupe. 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Winston Hamann, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Khalil Gibran International Ac School DBN: 15K592 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Winston Hamann Title Principal Maria Huliaris Assistant Principal Irene Moussa Parent Coordinator Karin Stinson ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ahmed Yahya Parent Ilhem Chebout Teacher/Subject Area Misty Mitchell Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Gina Shedid School Counselor Donald Conyers Ana Vasquez Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/27/18 6/27/18 6/27/18 6/27/18 6/27/18 6/27/18 6/27/18 1/1/01 1/1/01 6/27/18 6/27/18 6/27/18 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 15K592 School Name: Khalil Gibran International Academy Superintendent: Richard Cintron The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Irene Moussa Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use the Home Language Survey Form to assess students’ written translation and oral interpretation needs. A survey is sent to the parents to inform us of their interpretation needs (either written, oral, or both). After determining their needs, we use both in-house and outside translators for our two major second languages: Arabic and Spanish. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 7  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 127 95 8 1 1 1 11 3 English Arabic Bengali Fulani Haitian Creole Korean Spanish Urdu 51.2 38.3 3.2 0.4 0.4 0.4 4.4 1.2 129 93 8 1 1 1 11 3 52 37.5 3.2 0.4 0.4 0.4 4.4 1.2 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Not applicable Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include Families procedures to ensure Monthly calendar (hard copy, electronic copy shared and posted on school's website); The last Friday of the month prior. Parent-teacher conference announcements (6 times a year); After-school program information (Fall and Spring); New York State testing dates (December and May); As per doe parent calendar, at least the month prior. timely provision of translated documents to parents. Calendar is translated by PC or Arabic teacher. Bilingual staff also support with translations, particularly Arabic and Spanish. Advanced bilingual student/intern who is over 18 is also utilized for Arabic, Spanish, Bengali and Urdu. 8  Parent letters (3 times per year) ; From October to June at different intervals. KGIA Newsletter (4 times per year); school-wide Gathering invites (Holiday Gathering; Valentine's Day Dance; Honor Roll celebrations; Dads Day; Moms Day; June Graduation) As per doe and state assessment calendar the month before. September, January and April Sent home quarterly We also reach out to the Translation and Interpretation Unit by calling 718-935-2013 or emailing hello@schools.nyc.gov. We provide the online resource to the parents by sharing the link schools.nyc.gov/hello. Announcements are printed in Arabic and Spanish from the doe website. Announcement is translated by PC or Arabic teacher as needed. Notices sent as per the month where the celebration occur. Translation printed as needed. Translated by PC or Arabic teacher or Advanced bilingual student/intern. 9  Translated by PC or Arabic teacher or Advanced bilingual student/intern. Translated as needed. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Curriculum Night and Parent-Teacher conferences as per the doe calendar for High Schools. Parents are always welcome to come to the school at any given time, with or without an appointment, to inquire about their children. Notices are sent home at least the month prior and then the month of and then regular reminders are sent via e-messenger and email. plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Since the two other languages than English we need to translate the most are Arabic and Spanish, we have 6 staff members who are fluent in Arabic and 3 staff members who are fluent in Spanish. So far this bilingual personnel is sufficient to cover for 0  translation as needed. In addition we have a number of senior students who are older than 18 and are fully bilingual in the languages we need the most, and are very willing to support translating for some clerical (non-sensitive) information if needed. Interpretation in the other languages is provided as requested and every effort is made to accommodate the request, including contacting the translation and interpretation unit. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We will email in their native languages as much as possible and also contact families via phone in their native languages. We know pretty much whose parents need a translated message. If given the nature of the emergency it requires more bilingual personnel than what we have we will contact the Language Line (over-the-phone interpretation service). Then we will send home a translated notice. 1  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In order to communicate effectively with the parents of ENLs or non-ENLs parents who cannot communicate in English, we will continue to send home notices to parents in their native language, when available. Full translations or attached blurbs on parent communiqués are used to keep parents informed. Oral and written translation in Arabic and Spanish is provided by our in-house staff to ensure timely provision of documents. We also provide the same interpretation services for those parents who speak Bengali, Urdu, Fulani, Haitian Creole and Korean as needed. Parents will continue to be apprised of events through our monthly calendar, voice messenger, weekly update of the Parent bulletin board and regular updates of our website (www.khalilgibranhs.org). The PC has made all staff aware of the personnel in the school who may be called upon to translate if needed. They all understand that upon request and need, we must provide interpretation services to any parent. We will offer additional PD for staff on language access requirements and resources. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) KGIA will continue to fulfill this regulation by determining within thirty days of a student’s enrollment the primary language spoken by the parent of the each student. If such language is not English, it will be determined whether the parent requires language assistance in order to communicate effectively with the school. We will maintain current records of the primary language in ATS as well as on the students’ Emergency Card. We will provide timely provision of translated documents through our existing translating services. During one-on-one meetings when needed, we will provide translation services by our in-house staff. In addition we have sent home the Parent's Bill of Rights and have made parents aware of our translation and interpretation services, including posting the interpretation notice signs in the main office and the parent coordinator's office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We are a small school community where parents feel welcome and know that they can communicate their needs or concerns directly or through an in-house translator. After any session or meeting requiring translation we always make sure parents walk away satisfied and with a clear sense of accomplishment. 2  A parent survey to request parent feedback on how to improve our language access services will be sent in the fall. 3 
