 22K630 School Name: PROFESSIONAL PATHWAYS HIGH SCHOOL Principal: DAVID DECAMP   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Professional Pathways High School 22K630 School Number (DBN): 33000011630 9-12 3000 Avenue X Brooklyn, NY 11235 718-3326290 Phone Number: 718-332-6296 Fax: David J. DeCamp ddecamp@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 22 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: David J. DeCamp Elizabeth Weinert Audra Fox Kwabena Adu Diane Ortiz CiriloOrdonez Roxana Chaudrey FrantzSaint Jean District Information Paul Rotondo Superintendent: 198 ForsythStreet New York, NY 10002 Protond@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 646-654-1261 Phone Number: 646-654-1742 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Mauriciere de Govia Executive Director: 415 89th Street Brooklyn, NY 11209 Mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-240-3677 Phone Number: 718-759-3909 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) David J. DeCamp Elizabeth Weinert Audra Fox Linda McAnaw Diane Ortiz CiriloOrdonez Roxana Chaudrey Franz Saint Jean Kathleen Cash Scott Dubin Meredith Joseph *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Vice-President PA/PTA Member/Parent Member/Assistant Principal   Name Kwabena Adu Laura Franceschi Maureen Dubin DignaVictor Signature (Blue Ink) Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/Guidance Counselor Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The school’s mission is to support the academic and social needs of students through strong partnerships between all members of the school community, reengage students academically through hands-on learning with an emphasis on post-secondary readiness and literacy, and build college/career readiness through computer literacy and career exposure.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Professional Pathways High School is a Transfer High School dedicated to educating and motivating students in an alternative setting through a personalized approach to learning and development. As a school, we believe that all students can succeed with the right supports, and that part of their success will be in helping them identify and develop career/college goals. We will ensure that each student graduates with clearly articulated goals and a plan for post-secondary success. We have just completed our fourth year as a high school, having opened in the 2013-2014 school year. We are a Title I school with about 75% of our students receiving free lunch. Demographically we are 50.93% male and 49.07% female, 31.68% African-American; 34.68% Hispanic; 24.84% White; 06.83% Asian; and .62% Native-American. All of our students are at least 16 years old and at least one year behind in high school upon entrance. PPHS's most important partnership is with CAMBA. This CBO provides a Learning to Work Program that offers PPHS students paying job internships and provides training in writing resumes and helps students understand both the hard and soft skills that will allow them to get and keep jobs. Additionally, CAMBA provides 3 advocate counselors and a Social Worker to help our students navigate the myriad challenges they face. College Confident is an important partner that helps us get all of our students to identify colleges of interest through college visits and counseling sessions. Additionally, they help every student fill out the necessary paperwork, FAFSA, college applications, and entrance essays. Moreover, each of these documents is saved to Google Docs so that students do not lose this information. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Currently 20% of our students are classified as Students With Disabilties (SWD), and significant numbers are well behind grade level because of poor attendance or other factors. Our students face many significant social/emotional obstacles: over 10% of our students admit to having a mental-health diagnosis; another 6% have had a parent die within the last 2 years; another 24% are diagnosed with chronic health issues. Although there are a number of other initial challenges our students must navigate, this should give the reader a sense of the challenges our students face as they attempt to deal with their academics. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During the 2016-17 school year, we made the most progress with student achievement. Specifically, our six-year graduation rate improved from 65% to 69.6%. However, although we have made some strides in improving the rigor, we need to improve rigor school-wide across all contents and disciplines. While teacher teams have made a more concerted effort to meet and discuss curriculum, student needs, and improving instruction, it is evident that we need to improve how we review student work to improve instruction and address student needs. Additionally, the inter-visitation cycle has been improved but needs further development to make it a true teacher development tool. There is also a need for professional development about Danielson 3B so that teachers have a better understanding of what it looks like to be highly effective. Hence, this year we will focus on the collaborative teacher element. Our 2016-2017 PPO identified pedagogy as an area in need of growth, especially in regards to creating learning experiences that require higher-order thinking. It was also noted that we should continue to build upon effective differentiated classroom practices to support rigorous learning in all classrooms. We will address the matter school-wide by replicating the practices of highly effective teachers in all classrooms. To meet these goals, we have also participated in the Learning Partners Program during the 2018-2019 school year to address our areas of need. We will 0  use our baseline assessments and argumentative writing assessments to guide us in differentiating units and lessons to meet individual student needs. Through our teacher inter-visitation cycle and school-wide PDs, we will describe, model, and evaluate best practices to promote student discussions and engagement. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 22K630 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 205 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 4 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 7 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 6 1 School Composition (2017-18) 80.0% % Attendance Rate 76.6% % Reduced Lunch 3.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.0% 33.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 25.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.25 6% 17% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 70% 35% 21.0% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO N/A NO No N/A 39 31 63.0% 3.9% 18.0% 32.2% 7.8% 1.0% 2 6% 6.1 N/A N/A 66% 45% 61.9% 0% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Professional Pathways High School is designed to serve over-age and under-credited students. Most of our students have had poor attendance history over their previous three years before entering our community; this has had a negative impact on their academic performance. We believe that in order to re-engage students, part of our job is to help students identify and develop career/college goals so that they have a rationale to complete high school and are prepared for post-secondary options. In order for them to do that, we must develop their argumentative writing skills since this is the primary modality in which they will be evaluated in college. Moreover, their success on Global, US History and Common Core ELA exams is also predicated on their ability to write a strong argumentative essay. During the 2015-2016 school year, we built upon our use of the argumentative writing cycle by using a data tracker to identify individual student and group needs and growth to inform classroom instruction and individual conferencing goals. We repeated this three times during the school year to get a better picture of student gains and areas for growth. Each department then created its own content-specific conferencing tool to use in their classrooms. During the 2016-2017 school year we worked on strengthening these structures to ensure that unit and lesson plans were designed to meet student needs while meeting standards. We continued to improve on our assessment and feedback cycle. Individualized conferencing was expanded to cover more areas of class work (such as projects and lab work) and was used to inform unit and lesson planning. This resulted in data -driven unit plans and differentiated, engaging lessons. Students will also be expected to set academic goals and track their progress based on their conferences with teachers. Our 2016-2017 Quality Review identified pedagogy as an area in need of growth. To accommodate this need, we will establish an instructional development protocol for usage during Collaborative Planning Time--which all core content area teachers have with their content area one period every day. Teachers will evaluate lessons for rigor and scaffolding collectively during Collaborative Planning Time (CPT). This will be built into the CPT protocol and monitored by administration. Administration will provide PD for teaching staff on how to define rigor and how to scaffold effectively. 3  We will continue to participate in the Learning Partners Program to engage in inter-school collaborative planning. This will grant our teachers an unparalleled opportunity to further improve classroom instruction by connecting with teachers from two other transfer schools to collaborate on building strong pedagogical practices and well-developed lessons that are rigorous yet scaffolded effectively to meet the needs of our population. An additional focus of Learning Partners will include a focus on the mechanics of good writing as detailed in Hochman's "Writing Revolution." Our writing assessment cycle has allowed our students to organize good writing. However, we believe with the implementation of the mechanics of strong writing we can help students improve their writing performance even more. We were accepted into the Algebra for All program during the 2016-2017 school year. This provided our math teachers training in Algebra teaching practices that have been demonstrably more beneficial in Algebra instruction. The impact of this work was demonstrated in CC Algebra Regents scores increasing from a 39% pass rate in June 2016 to a 59% pass rate in the June 2017. As of June of 2018, 60.3% pass rate. We will continue our work with Algebra for All this year and will be looking for additional increases in the Algebra pass rate as well as improvements in the CC Geometry Regents pass rate as well because we believe that students stronger algebra skills and the improved instructional practices will have benefits for Geometry. Our school's MOSL for 2016-2017 was effective. We are awaiting our MOSL results for 2017-18. We expect that score to be, at least, effective. This is due in large part to our success with improving writing skills as was demonstrated in Regents performance as well as significant gains in Algebra Regents. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through daily writing tasks that require higher-order thinking skills and weekly, one-on-one student-teacher conferences that are designed to provide individualized student support, our school will improve the writing proficiency--as measured by the NYS Common Core Argumentative Writing Rubric (Grades 11-12)--of 70% of our students (or greater) by at least one level. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. We will use a a baseline tracker to follow student progress in each content area knowledge and writing skills as we administer a baseline test at the beginning of each trimester. For example, Living Environment students will take a test that measures their content area knowledge and their writing skills at the beginning of each trimester. core content knowledge such as understanding of genetics, ecology, etc. will be tracked to identify areas of weakness and strength both as an aggregate and as individuals to inform instructional decision making. 2. Teachers will use results from the content-area baseline tests to develop unit and lesson plans that are aligned to standards and tailored to meet student need in their content area during department Common Planning time (CPT) that meets daily as part of their C6R. 3. After a focused effort to improve student writing through rigorous instruction, we will use the results for our Argumentative Writing Assessment cycle to determine if our efforts to address student deficiencies with writing are effective. Specifically, regarding the Argumentative Writing assessment, we expect an aggregated .5 level growth school-wide. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers, students Start date is September 2018- June 2019 Administrators, Teachers, and students Teachers Teachers, students Start date is September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Administration & Teachers Administration & Teachers 4. ENL and SPED teachers will meet with content area teachers to discuss strategies to assist SWD and ELL students. Teachers Teachers September 2018-June 2019 5. SLT will keep the families, students, and staff informed on the plan and its progress. Principal and Parent Coordinator September 2018- June 2019 Principal & Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We have arrived at our school wide goals through discussions with the SLT. Our academic vision is shared with parents through our monthly letters that we mail, academic goals are listed on our website, we describe the work that both 5  teachers and students will be engaged in over the course of the year during open house and during parent teacher conferences. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will need to pay some teachers per-session for grading assessments in a timely fashion so that the data is fresh and usable.As well as opportunities to refine conferencing tools and protocols. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In December of 2018 and in March of 2019, we will monitor progress of the students in the content area baseline assessments to determine how effective instruction was at improving student writing and content knowledge. From analysis of the data, instructional priorities will be identified and unit plans and lessons will be designed to address student needs both as an aggregate and individually. By June 2019, to support our goal of improving student writing, we will have developed necessary tools for conferencing with students in all content areas. Conferencing will be designed to address students' content-specific strengths and weaknesses, as they relate to writing. Teachers will use these tools to develop data-driven, student specific lessons and unit plans in their subjects that elevate student strengths and improve areas of need. Overall, student performance will show that 70% of students that receive weekly feedback sessions will improve by one level of proficiency using the NYS Common Core Argumentative Writing Rubric--Grades 11-12. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We will use our content area designed baseline assessments that are given at the beginning of every trimester to assess student progress. Additionally, we will look at January Regents data to determine student needs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Professional Pathways has worked diligently in the four years we have been opened to develop a safe, inviting and supportive school environment. As a transfer school, we believe that a safe, supportive environment is primary to helping students who are over-age and under-credited. Therefore we have implemented: ● Advocate counselors meet with students for social and emotional support. ● Staff act as Graduation Guardian for small groups of students, meeting with them to discuss academic progress and career/college aspirations. Additionally, we use this as the basis of our Advisory which is used to promote a college going culture, self-advocacy skills, and understanding the importance of mindset. These and other student centered programs have helped us achieve very low suspension rates. As a result of these factors, during the 2017-2018 we were named as a Respect for All School for the second year in a row. PPHS has been rated as Well-Developed for the Learning Environment for the past 4 years in both the QRs and the PPOs. However, we have worked extremely hard to improve our attendance. Currently, our attendance rate is 63% for the year which is a 5% improvement over the previous year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 22K630 will provide a supportive and safe school community that will increase student attendance by 5%. Specifically, in our efforts to do so, we will host school-wide community events to celebrate student achievement, schedule advisory sessions that meet bi-monthly to support students' academic and social-emotional progress, continue to grant our students exposure to college and career options through trips and internships and school-community collaboration, and continue to host weekly case conferences with school and CAMBA staff members to collaboratively address student needs. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? We have school-wide community events throughout the year such as community festivals, potlucks, talent show, and art gallery night where we celebrate student achievement with families. As a school, through our Graduation Guardian initiative, we will continue our advisory program, which will meet bi-monthly to support students’ academic and social-emotional progress. Each advisory session will meet for one period utilizing a curriculum developed by our school community. Students and parents Students We will continue to expose our students to college/career options through: College trips, LTW internships, Meetings with College representatives and collaboration with College Confident program. Students Administration will continue to case conference with CAMBA Advocate Counselors, teachers, guidance counselors weekly to address students’ skills and progress with post-secondary options. Students September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 Guidance Counselor, CAMBA Staff, Assistant Principal, Teachers Guidance Counselor, CAMBA Staff, Assistant Principal, Teachers CAMBA Staff, Guidance Counselor, College Confident CAMBA Staff, Guidance Counselor, Assistant Principal, Principal, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We communicate with families about upcoming events through monthly newsletters, direct calls from the parent coordinator and the CAMBA staff, Facebook, the school website, and SLT and PTA meetings. Additionally, we have used Kinvolved as a real-time attendance app that sends all parents text-messages each period a student is absent, moreover, these messages are translated into the parents language preference. Thus, parents know right away if their child is missing a class. All families are made aware of the LTW program during the school intake process; however, we continue to reach out to parents to have them encourage their child to get an LTW internship through phone calls and parent meetings. Parents are invited to participate in potlucks at the school the day before Thanksgiving, the day before Winter Break, and the day before Spring Break. Additionally, we use Parent Association meeting nights as an awards night to draw more parents to the PA meeting and encourage greater parent involvement. We invite families to attend the Talent Show and Art Gallery Night. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 8  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Pathways High School will support parents and families by providing parents and families with the information needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in creating a supportive environment. We will share information about programs, meetings, and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents understand. We will invite parents to attend school college trips. We will be using Kinvolved in our efforts to immediately notify parents of every period of school a student is absent from in real time. This will cost $9.00 per child for the year. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our yearly attendance report will show a 5% improvement. Our attendance average for the 2018-2019 was 62.9%. By February 2019, through our efforts to create a safe and supportive environment, our average attendance will be at 66 % or higher--our mid-point benchmark. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS attendance data and reviewing outreach methods, logs from Skedula, ATS, and, CAMBA to determine which strategies are most effective in increasing attendance. The use of Kinvolved will make our outreach for absences immediate. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Regarding teacher collaboration, as indicated by our 2016-2017 quality review report, we were rated as well-developed for indicator 1.4 (Positive Learning Environment). Additionally, we were rated as well-developed for indicator 3.4 (High Expectations). One trend that emerged in the evidence provided for both indicators, there was "consistent communication... to keep students abreast of their progress toward promotion and graduation." This is a notable strength that was documented in the report with compelling evidence. 2. Although our 2016-2017 quality review report documented how we have excelled in creating a positive learning environment and maintaining a culture of high expectations in our school, the same report documented the need to improve pedagogically (indicator 1.2). According to the report, "there were numerous instances of students writing during observed lessons. However, the level of thinking required to engage in some of these tasks varied." Furthermore, "in a number of classes, questions from the teachers were low level, only requiring students to respond with one word closed-ended answers. Additionally, in most cases, discussions were teacher-centered with very few opportunities for students to speak to one another and build on each other’s thinking." This lack of seamless and uniform curricular depth was also noted in the supporting evidence for quality indicator 1.1 (curriculum), which read, "Though annotation guides were present in classrooms, curricular documents did not emphasize annotation as a means for engaging text to coherently promote rigorous habits and college readiness." This noted trend is one that we believe that we can effectively address--with priority--through focused teacher collaboration. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To ensure that all teachers are supported in their efforts to engage students in classroom experiences that feature tasks and discussions that both involve higher-order thinking, all teachers will will be observed by their peers at least three times by June 2019 and receive same-day, peer feedback after each observation. This feedback will tightly align with Danielson's Framework Components 3B and 3C. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). As a school we have an on-going inter-visitation cycle. Three teams will consist of teachers that vary in subject areas. The team leaders and the observation focus will switch every trimester. Teachers will receive written and oral feedback from the team that has observed them during professional development time. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Entire teaching staff September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal and teacher team leaders. Teachers will attend outside professional developments addressing the needs of SWD, ELL, and other high need students. (This includes the monthly meetings at the borough center). Selected teachers Teachers will work in subject area teams to create, evaluate, and refine questioning and discussion protocols for their class/subject. Teachers will share their work in staff meetings once a month to collaborate with other teachers in different subjects and receive feedback on their work. Entire teaching staff September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-2019 Principal and Assistant Principal Assistant Principal and teacher team leaders. School will host social events that celebrate student success and achievement and build ties between teachers and parents. Teachers will also use Skedula and technology to improve communication with parents and families. Entire teaching staff September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We have arrived at our school wide goals through discussions with the SLT. Our academic vision is shared with parents through our monthly newsletters that we mail, we list those goals on our website, and describe our vision during school open houses and the work that both teacher and students will be engaged in over the course of the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1  School-wide Professional Development will target these three domains. Teachers will be provided time to meet to identify protocol for observations, time to provide effectively post-observation feedback. When necessary, per session will available for teachers to complete the required tasks. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. To ensure that all teachers are supported in their efforts to engage students in classroom experiences that feature tasks and discussions that both involve higher-order thinking, all teachers will will be observed by their peers at least once by February 2018 and receive same-day peer feedback after each observation. This feedback will tightly align with Danielson's Framework Components 3B and 3C. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Informal and formal observation feedback from teachers Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1) Our 2016-2017 Framework for Great Schools Report identifies "Effective School Leadership" as an area of strength--with the number of positive survey responses involving both teacher influence and instructional leadership tallying ten or more percentage points above the city average. In the years prior, determinations regarding leadership capacity at our school were also favorable. The 2015-2016 PPO, the 2014-2015 QR, and the 2014-2015 PPO all identified and rated the leadership capacity at our school as "highly effective." 2) An area of need, relating specifically to instructional leadership, emerged as we reviewed data regarding math Regents pass rates at our school. In order to address our lagging test scores, we have chosen to wholly commit to the Algebra for All initiative. This will allow our school to continue to dedicate time and resources to increasing our math Regents pass rates from 60% to 70%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To increase the overall percentage of students passing math exams in our school by at least 10% (from 60% in the 2017-2018 school year to 70% or greater) by June 2019, our school will fully execute each of the program components of the Algebra for All initiative by attending all five full-day sessions, providing additional support for students with disabilities and ELL's through after school and Saturday tutoring, and mentoring teachers to aid them in their efforts to complete inquiry processes to identify and address weaknesses in student performance and teacher instruction. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? We are entering our third year with Algebra for All. Our newest Algebra teacher will attend the summer trainings as well as the 5 training days throughout the school year. The Principal will attend required administrative trainings. Algebra teachers and Principal. Summer 2018- June 2019 Principal and both Algebra teachers. Students with disabilities and ELLs will receive extra support through after school and Saturday school tutoring. SWDs and ELL students. Teachers will be mentored in inquiry process to help identify weaknesses in student performance and teacher instruction. Algebra Teachers September 2018-June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Algebra, SPED, and ESL teachers Algebra teachers, and Lead ELA teacher 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We continually invite parents to the SLT and PTA meetings through direct phone calls, during parent meetings, monthly newsletters, and our website. Additionally, we have created opportunities to increase parent involvement by having awards night the same night as the PTA, have the art teacher provide activities, we have held PTA meeting at local restaurants, and provided parents with gift cards for attendance at PTA meetings. We provide Financial Aid workshops in both English and Spanish, and have engaged parents through our community garden project and mural painting in the school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Algebra for All initiative will be funded by central this year. However, additional time for teachers to plan and work with students will be supported through per session pay . Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 4  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, our school will increase the overall percentage of students passing math Regents exams by at least 5% (from 60% to 65%)--our mid-point benchmark. This will be measured by reviewing student outcomes on the math Regents exams that will be administered at our school in January 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use NYS Regents data to determine if overall student math performance has improved. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Research shows that students that have parents/guardians involved in their student’s education, have higher attendance and graduation rates and are more likely to attend college. To that end we have tried to build strong relationships with parents around school involvement and providing opportunities for them to be involved in planning with their students’ career/college goals. College Confident provides at least two Financial Aid Workshops for parents per school year. This work also includes assisting families in filling out the FAFSA forms and college applications and providing translation services. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, by fostering greater parent engagement through financial-aid workshops, college trips, awards events, a talent show, Parent Association Meetings, and Parent-teacher-conferences, we will increase the parent survey response rate by 20% (to 42%). The parent survey response rate in the 2017-2018 school year was only 22%. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will have monthly PA/PTA meetings – second Thursday of every month at 6:00 PM – Time was chosen by parents to maximize parent participation Parents and guardians of students We will have school-wide Community events autumn, winter break, spring break community festival/potlucks to eat and celebrate student achievement with families Students and their families We will use our website and Pupil Path to communicate with parents about student progress and upcoming events. Students,parents, and school staff We will hold Financial Aid Workshops for Parents and students Parents and students September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 Parent Coordinator, SLT CAMBA Staff, Principal, Asst. Principal, Teachers Principal, Asst. Principal, Teachers Guidance counselors, College confident, and CAMBA college counselor 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We continually invite parents to the SLT and PTA meetings through direct phone calls, during parent meetings, monthly newsletters, and our website. Additionally, we have created opportunities to increase parent involvement by having awards night the same night as the PTA, have the art teacher provide activities, we have held PTA meeting at local restaurants, and provided parents with gift cards for attendance at PTA meetings. We provide Financial Aid workshops in both English and Spanish, and have engaged parents through our community garden project and mural painting in the school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 7  We hire College Confident to work with students and families on College Applications, FASFA, and taking students and parents on college trips. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 42% of our parents will have committed to completing the forthcoming parent survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will survey parents to in February 2019 to assess the percentage of parents who are willing to commit to complete the forthcoming, city-issued parent survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Subject Area tutoring is available Mondays 3:20 PM – 4:10 PM, Small group instruction One-on-one Tutoring Wednesdays 8:30 AM -9:00 AM, When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Mondays 3:20 PM – 4:10 PM Wednesdays 8:30 AM -9:00 AM Thursdays: 3:20 PM – 4:30 PM Saturdays: 9:00 AM – 1:00 PM Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All students are eligible for AIS; specifically, students will be targeted based on the results of our school wide assessment. Mathematics All students are eligible for AIS; specifically, students will be targeted based on the results of our school wide assessment. Thursdays: 3:20 PM – 4:30 PM, and Saturdays: 9:00 AM – 1:00 PM After school tutoring assignments switch every trimester (based on assessment results and academic performance). Additionally, our small class size increases engagement and participation. Subject Area tutoring is available Mondays 3:20 PM – 4:10 PM, Small group instruction Mondays 3:20 PM – 4:10 PM One-on-one Tutoring Wednesdays 8:30 AM -9:00 AM, Thursdays: 3:20 PM – 4:30 PM, and Saturdays: 9:00 AM – 1:00 PM After school tutoring assignments switch every Wednesdays 8:30 AM -9:00 AM Thursdays: 3:20 PM – 4:30 PM Saturdays: 9:00 AM – 1:00 PM 9  Science All students are eligible for AIS; specifically, students will be targeted based on the results of our school wide assessment. Social Studies All students are eligible for AIS; specifically, students will be targeted based on the results of our school wide assessment. Thursdays: 3:20 PM – 4:30 PM, and Saturdays: 9:00 AM – 1:00 PM After school tutoring assignments switch every trimester (based on assessment results and academic performance). Additionally, our small class size increases engagement and participation. Subject Area tutoring is available Mondays 3:20 PM – 4:10 PM, trimester (based on assessment results and academic performance). Additionally, our small class size increases engagement and participation. Subject Area tutoring is available Mondays 3:20 PM – 4:10 PM, Small group instruction Mondays 3:20 PM – 4:10 PM One-on-one Tutoring Wednesdays 8:30 AM -9:00 AM, Wednesdays 8:30 AM -9:00 AM Thursdays: 3:20 PM – 4:30 PM Saturdays: 9:00 AM – 1:00 PM Small group instruction Mondays 3:20 PM – 4:10 PM Wednesdays 8:30 AM -9:00 AM Thursdays: 3:20 PM – 4:30 PM Saturdays: 9:00 AM – 1:00 PM One-on-one Tutoring Wednesdays 8:30 AM -9:00 AM, Thursdays: 3:20 PM – 4:30 PM, and Saturdays: 9:00 AM – 1:00 PM After school tutoring assignments switch every trimester (based on assessment results and academic performance). Additionally, our 0  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) All students are eligible for AIS; specifically, students will be targeted based on the results of our school wide assessment. small class size increases engagement and participation. The Guidance Counselor works in conjunction with our CAMBA staff to ensure that students are receiving one-on-one counseling to address individual academic needs. Students all have meetings with the Guidance Counselor to discuss transcripts, report cards, and academic progress. One-on-one counseling Every student receives academic counseling once a week by their CAMBA advocate counselor and monthly counseling with the Guidance Counselor 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) During the 2017-2018 school year, PPHS had 9 students that were identified as Students in Need of Temporary Housing. Currently, however, we have one student who has been identified as such. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 2  It is important at PPHS that all of our students feel supported and safe in an environment conducive for academic success and social-emotional well-being. The services we are planning to provide to our Students in Temporary Housing consists of: -Counseling services provided by our Guidance Counselors and CAMBA Counselors and Social Worker -Utilizing STH funds to provide "Pioneer packages" for our students that include bags, toiletry, clothing, academic utensils (pens, books, paper) -Connecting our students and families to resources in the community. These resources are also listed on our school website so families can access them as soon as they need them. -Offer laptops that STH can sign out on a weekly basis for homework, college and career research, etc. -Connect our STH to CAMBA's Learn-To-Work program -Institute a peer group for STH Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 3 N/A 4  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We have a very competitive hiring process that selects teachers through a school hiring committee process. Highly-qualified teachers are given responsibilities and invited to be leaders for other teachers and we invite them into the administrative decision-making process. We encourage HQT to participate in PD opportunities provided by Brooklyn South Borough center and opportunities through the Transfer School Superintendency. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All staff take part in weekly PD at the school with a focus on Danielson, data-driven assessments, inter-visitations, and inquiry team. Additionally, we are part of the Learning Partners which provides an opportunity to do inter-visitations with two other schools as well as monthly meetings to improve instruction. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 5  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Title I assistance is being used to purchase College Confident to ensure that each student has all paperwork to attend college completed, attend college tours, and provide families support around obtaining financial aid. Our use of Skedula/Pupil path allows us to share information easily and in real time with students and families. Our use of PLATO allows our students who are over age and under credited to accelerate credit accumulation and prepare for Regents exams. We have provided extra counseling hours to assist students who are trying to negotiate considerable challenges, and supporting the cost of an extra special education teacher to support the diverse learning needs of our students. Through our funding of a special education teacher, we are able to provide more targeted assistance to students that struggle through individualized and small group instruction. Extra counseling hours allows us to meet the rather significant socialemotional counseling needs of our students so that they can then begin to address their academic needs. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Sect 5A Part 1, 2, 3 ,5a. and 5b, Section 5b part 1, 3, and 4a Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 143,956.00 x 6  Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal 0 0 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 1,991,682.00 x Section 5C part 1, 2 ,3, 4a and 5a Section 5D part 2 and 3 Section 5 part 5a 5b and 5e Part 1 , 2, 3, 4a 5a, 5b Section 6 Section 7 Sect 5A Part 1, 2, 3 ,5a. and 5b, Section 5b part 1, 3, and 4a Section 5C part 1, 2 ,3, 4a and 5a Section 5D part 2 and 3 Section 5 part 5a 5b and 5e Part 1 , 2, 3, 4a 5a, 5b Section 6 Section 7 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 7  combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 8  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Professional Pathways High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Professional Pathways High School's policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Professional Pathways High School's Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The Professional Pathways High School community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of Professional Pathways High School. The findings of the evaluation through Professional Pathways High School surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by Professional Pathways High School. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the Professional Pathways High School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. 9  Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the Professional Pathways High School community. Professional Pathways High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for Professional Pathways High School staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the Professional Pathways High School will: Parental Involvement and School Quality ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the Professional Pathways High School's Parent Involvement Policy and the Professional Pathways High School's -Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the Professional Pathways High School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between Professional Pathways High School and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the Professional Pathways High School and will work to ensure that the Professional Pathways High School environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; 0  ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about Professional Pathways High School's Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the Professional Pathways High School's educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical Professional Pathways High School documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Professional Pathways High School will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Team, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about Professional Pathways High School activities and student progress; ● providing Professional Pathways High School planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) 1  School-Parent Compact (SPC) Professional Pathways High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 3  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; 4  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 22 School Name Professional Pathways High School Borough Brooklyn School Number 630 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal David DeCamp Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Laura Franceschi Teacher/Subject Area Michael Shanley/History Teacher/Subject Area /Eliza Conly-Dwyer/SPED Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Paul Rotondo Assistant Principal Meredith Joseph Coach NA School Counselor Kwabena Adu Parent Audra Fox Parent Coordinator Linda McAnaw Field Support Center Staff Member NA Other (Name and Title) Kevin Sparaco (Science) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 211 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 7 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.32% 6  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Three times a year, students complete a teacher created baseline in their English classes, testing the students reading and writing skills. The exam is common core aligned and examines the students ability to read for information in English. Students then create a text based response, reading comprehension questions, and an argument essay. This information is then used to examine student progress throughout the year, gaps in their understanding, and create a learning plan for each student through teacher/student conferencing throughout the school year. Professional Pathways also utilizes all previous assessment students complete at the student's previous school including, but not limited to data regarding the NYSESLAT scores, Fountas and Pinnel. At the beginning of each trimester, the ENL teacher evaluates the reading comprehension and writing proficiency of each ENL student using in-house assessments. Professional Pathways is a transfer school, thus each student comes to the school as an emerging ELL or higher. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 7  We have an LAP team meets twice a month to discuss progress and potential supports for each ENL student. Additionally, during weekly case conferencing with the teaching staff, we accumulate information on each ENL student from every teacher. This allows us to identify strategies that work best for each student, issues that may be impeding an ENL student's progress, or socio-emotional issues that the student is contending with in order to build a more comprehensive approach to serving the student. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate our programs success for the ENLs based on student achievement. This includes student passing rates, in class baselines, school wide assessment, and Regents passing rate, and graduation. We look at individual growth in content-area classes, yearly improvement on NYSESLAT, credit accumulation, and Regents performance. Additionally, we analyze individual student performance 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have an LAP team meets twice a month to discuss progress and potential supports for each ENL student. Additionally, during weekly case conferencing with the teaching staff, we accumulate information on each ENL student from every teacher. This allows us to identify strategies that work best for each student, issues that may be impeding an ENL student's progress, or socio-emotional issues that the student is contending with in order to build a more comprehensive approach to serving the student. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Students at Professional Pathways have all successfully acquired the skills of an emerging ELL or higher. The data reveals that proficiency levels on the NYSESLAT correlate with the number of years an ELL has been serviced. The trend shows that 75% of our ELLS from 2016-2017 have tested out. Another data pattern that has emerged amongst the grades is that our students demonstrate growth when in our transfer school setting as they are provided with socio-emotional support and academic rigor and support. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We have an LAP team meets twice a month to discuss progress and potential supports for each ENL student. Additionally, during weekly case conferencing with the teaching staff, we accumulate information on each ENL student from every teacher. This allows us to identify strategies that work best for each student, issues that may be impeding an ENL student's progress, or socio-emotional issues that the student is contending with in order to build a more comprehensive approach to serving the student. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). 8  a. Freestanding ENL program. Students are grouped (blocked) in their ELL class with the ELL teacher, Ms. Franceschi. Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding Level students are in one 54 minute period class/ day. Entering and Emerging students are in two 54 minute ELL periods/day. All students come to Pathways in order to obtain their necessary credits and graduate. They are given a separate location with time and a half for all exams. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A: c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All students are given the maximum of 360 minutes per week if they are entering or emerging ENLs. These students are given instructional time with an ENL instructor. intermediate and advanced ENLs are provided with 360 minutes as well in an ENL classroom. Additional time is given when needed in a pull out session. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Ms. Franceschi creates a CCSS aligned curriculum and uses SIOP to focus her language and content objectives. This is approved by Mr. DeCamp. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? All of our ENLs are emerging or transitioning; thus if they wish to hand in assignments in their L1, an appropriate system, such as Google translate, or instructor, such as the Spanish teacher, will translate the assignment, and the instructor will grade the assignment appropriately . 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. SIFE: We have one SIFE student. All SIFE students take an entrance exam and a school wide Baseline (3 times a year). Instruction is adjusted appropriately based on student performance. The student's progress (both social and emotional is monitored by the guidance Counselor and instructors in a community based conferencing weekly). B. We have no newcomers at our school because we are transfer school and students typically come to Professional Pathways after being a part of the NYC DOE system for at least 2 years. C. Developing: Developing ENL students are placed into two 54- minute ENL period/day. They are given a baseline three times a year to check their progress. Additionally, instruction is given based upon student performance. D. Long Term ENLs are provided with one period of ELL instruction per day (54 minutes/day). Student progress is monitored through baseline assessment. E. Former ENLs are provided with additional support in an ENL setting with the instructor. Additionally students are challenged in an appropriate setting by their content instructors and provided with additional ENL scaffolds (L1 translation, L1 dictionaries). 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 9  Instructors use the Engage NY Core Curriculum provided as an option by the DOE within their classrooms and their own content created curriculum. Each of the Common Core approved curriculum have assessments that monitor student development. ENLs are provided with scaffolds for close reading (annotation guides), and writing (RACE paragraph guide) to support their academic development. Additionally, students are provided with assignment specific scaffolds (graphic organizers, templates, and guides). 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students work in pull-out groups with Ms. Conly-Dwyer, the SPED instructor, and given allotted time and testing accommodations. Students are provided with the necessary testing accommodations. Additionally ENLs are provided with visual vocabulary charts, dictionaries, and scaffolds. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All of our students are emerging or higher; thus, they are provided with the option to complete their work in their L1. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will continue to document ENL progress through conferencing on various sub skills to monitor student progress and adjust instruction accordingly. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students are encouraged to join after school clubs and athletic events. Additionally, all ENLs participate in all elective courses. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All ELL students have access to native language dictionaries (Spanish, Urdu, Albanian, Uzbek). Students also have access to Google Translate if necessary, and bi-lingual books are available in each classroom library. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? NA 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All teachers have access to pupil path, and access to materials that support these students particular needs. Instructors modify instruction accordingly using the information as evidence for differentiation. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All ELL students have access to native language dictionaries (Spanish, Urdu, Albanian, Uzbek, Russian). Students also have access to Google Translate if necessary, and bi-lingual books are available in each classroom library. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). A 2 day student orientation is provided for all students to accustom students to school culture and expectations. 0  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We are a small school, thus we are able to offer Spanish as a second language. Through PLATO, students can take various foreign language. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Morning PDs are provided intermittently throughout the year for all school personnel. This is led by the ENL instructor and administration. All DOE related PDs are offered to ELL instructors to attend and expand their understanding of the ENL needs and instructional goals. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We are a transfer school and only accept students after they have been in a NYC high school for at least one year. Therefore, transition between middle and high school has already taken place. Ms. Fenton keeps all record of PDs in the main office. Once every 6 weeks a professional development is aligned to meeting the needs of ENL students. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During scheduled PTA meetings, parent teacher conferences, and intake interviews, parents are notified of the continuation of their student's services. They are notified of these events through letters mailed home in both English and translated into the home language. When a student falls behind, a meeting is requested with the parent and the student and school officials to discuss strategies to support the student. An interpreter is provided if necessary. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. PTA meetings are held monthly. Parents are informed of this meeting and encouraged to join through phone calls and letters. 1  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. We are a transfer school that serves overage under credited students that are at least a year behind in high school. 2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, David DeCamp, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Professional Pathways HS School DBN: 22K630 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) David DeCamp Title Principal Meredith Joseph Assistant Principal Linda McAnaw Parent Coordinator Laura Franceschi ENL/Bilingual Teacher Audra Fox Parent Eliza Conly-Dwyer/SPED Teacher/Subject Area Kevin Sparaco/Science Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Kwabna Adu School Counselor Paul Rotondo Natalie Hemmings-Noble Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member ELL Services Administrator N/A N/A N/A Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/27/18 09/27/18 09/27/18 09/27/18 09/27/18 09/27/18 09/27/18 09/27/18 09/27/18 09/27/18 09/27/18 09/27/18 09/27/18 09/27/18 09/27/18 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 22K630 School Name: Professional Pathways High School Superintendent: Mr. Rotondo The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Kwabena Adu Guidance Counselor Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. As a transfer school, all students must apply in person with their guardian. It is during this initial intake that we are able to most accurate assess the language preferences of our parents. Parents are required to fill out Student Emergency Contact cards during the application process. We will use translation services (718) 752-7373 when we need help translating guardian responses during the intake process. From this process, we can ensure that all communication with guardians is in the language of preference identified by them and cross reference this with HLIS. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 5  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Communication for all parents listed is both Written and Spoken: English Spanish Chinese Cantonese Bengali Haitian-Creole Hindi Russian Turkish Ukrainian See Below See Below See Below See Below 167 45 7 0 4 2 0 10 2 1 69.58 18.75 02.92 0 01.67 00.83 0 04.17 00.83 00.42 165 46 5 3 4 2 1 46 2 1 68.75 19.17 02.28 01.25 01.67 00.83 00.42 19.17 00.83 00.42 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Welcome letter with pertinent contact info September 5 CAP Condom availability program How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Sending document to translation services. 6  Military Opt-out Monthly calendars/newsletter Regents September 7 Translations Provided September 7 Translations Provided (Second to last Friday of every month) Translation Services (early January, early June, late July) Notifications, Progress Reports/Report Cards Trimester- School year, (two progress reports per trimester Every 4 weeks. Report cards: Trimester 1 - end of November, Trimester 2: Mid-March, Trimester 3, End of School Year Graduation notification Summer school Report cards Early June Mid-August Translation Provided Translation Services Translation Services Translation Services 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to We have the mandated open school nights and parent-teacher conferences as per Chancellor Guidelines. As per DOE Calendar Translations Provided provide interpretation service(s)? 7  Parent Association meetings First Thursday evening at 6:00 PM every month. Translation Services Parent Outreach Daily We meet all of our Parent/guardians during our intake process. Daily As a transfer school we are continually engaged with parents in an on-going basis especially around issues of attendance. All students have a Graduation Guardian and students with Spanish speaking parents are matched up with staff members that speak Spanish. Graduation Guardians are sometimes in touch with parents on a daily or weekly basis. In cases where we have needed Chinese interpretation we have a Chinese speaking school aide in the building that translates for us. In the event she is unavailable we use translation services at: (718) 752-7373. Staff members translate for Russian, Spanish, Haitian-Creole use translation services for all other (718) 752-7373 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 8  We have staff members that are fluent in Russian, Spanish, and Haitian-Creole. For parents that speak another language we will use translation services 718) 752-7373 or depending on the event may use a student that speaks the home language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We review this Policy on Day 2 of our Staff PD at the beginning of the year. We do a review of this Regulation during PD in February. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Each parent bulletin, including but not limited to welcome posters, parent bill of rights, parent guide to language access, and IDs, will be translated into the native language of the individual to encourage and provide parents with the opportunity to get involved in their educational process. In addition, during parent teacher conferences, parents will be provided with a visual models of the tools available to them to access their child’s grades, and the NYC DOE webpage. Educators as well as translators will be available to answer any questions during parent teacher conferences. In addition, CAMBA will continue to provide information to parents during the mandatory parent and student interviews as well as provide parents with information about the school during orientation and ongoing interactions. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Professional Pathways High School will ensure that they are gathering feedback using parent surveys and through verbal communication with parents. This will include PTA meetings, parent teacher conferences, communication teachers have with parents during the week (this will continue to be logged in a running Google document by all instructors) and conversations CAMBA counselors conduct with parents. 9 
