 18K642 School Name: URBAN ACTION ACADEMY Principal: IRIS FAREEDA GARCIA   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Urban Action Academy High School 18K642 331800011642 9 - 12 1600 Rockaway Parkway 718-290-8720 School Number (DBN): 718-290-8721 Phone Number: Tamarra Bradford Fax: Email Address: TBradford@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Dr.FareedaIris Garcia Mark Satchell Ms. Simone Dandridge Dr. FareedaIris Garcia SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Ms. CharmaineGabbidon JosiahAmbrose SamiyahBrown Erica Wright Geographical District: 18 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Michael Prayor Superintendent: 1830 Shore Blvd RM F11 Brooklyn, NY 11235 Mprayor@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-368-8515 Phone Number: 718-368-8517 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn South Team 6 Degovia Mauriciere FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 415 89 th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11209 cwatsonharris@gmail.com Executive Director’s Email Address: 617-212-4934 Phone Number: 718-630-1634 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Dr. FareedaIris Garcia Mark Satchell Ms. Simone Dandridge Ms. Zena Allen Ms. CharmaineGibbidon Josiah Ambrose SamiyaBrown Erica Wright Ms. Patricia Fraizer Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Cemented in our mission statement is the belief that at Urban Action Academy (UAA) High School, "[A]ll students will graduate equipped with the knowledge, skills, and personal choice to pursue college and/or professional careers in public service. Our UAA graduates will serve as public ambassadors propelled with a renewed sense of urgency to take action on a civic calling within their community, city, and nation.”   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Urban Action Academy High School is a small school of approximately 299 students housed on one half of the first and second floors of the Canarsie Educational Complex. The school is in its 10th year. Urban Action Academy endeavors to structure our school program to address the unique needs of all students. We have a strong belief that creating a culturally conscious, and responsive academic environment, will academically inspire and encourage students to take advantage of opportunities that could propel them above and beyond. As noted in the Framework for Great Schools, one of the key goals for SY 2018-19 is to ensure the social, physical and emotional needs of all students, including Students With Disabilities (SWDs) and English as a New Language (ENLs) are met through the development and implementation of rigorous and equitable programs of study that foster and allow each student to demonstrate academic mastery at or above the grade/performance level of the Common Core State Standards by the time of their high school graduation. Specifically, teachers will use differentiated instructional methods that includes subject specific tutoring, Restorative Justice Practices, conferences that will include parents and Guidance Counselors to support student goals and progress. We have a strong focus on our junior and senior class. We expect to ensure that the Guidance Counselor facilitates individual transcript review meetings with these students, that will include follow up conferences to ensure their timely graduation. A key initiative for SY 2018-19 is to ensure that all seniors execute their post high school goals by creating an actionable pathway that results in college acceptance and or entry into the workforce. Committed to this important work, our guidance counselors and academic advisers will continue to provide intensive and targeted college workshops on topics ranging from FAFSA, academic and athletic scholarships to one-on-one student sessions with the goal of having 100% of students apply to college. Among other program initiatives we endeavor to include in school year 2018-19 is our strong partnership and affiliation with Brooklyn College via the College Now program where students take college level courses after-school and on weekends. It is our expectation to partner with other colleges to provide our students with a wider range of choice and opportunities for early college exposure. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our students come from low socio-economic backgrounds that comprise various performance and instructional levels. We serve 20.4% of students with Individual Education Plans (IEP) and 25.28% of English Language Learners (ELL). Of the students who receive special education services, 21.82% are in Integrated Co-teaching classes. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 0  Key area of focus Throughout the SY 2017-18, most of our progress was seen through teacher collaboration. In teacher team meetings, they developed units, lessons and assessments collaboratively around the school's instructional focus of reading, writing, and vocabulary across all subjects. As a result of this collaboration, teachers experience an increase in student engagement. SY 2018-19 focus 1. Increase teacher leadership to develop cogent systems. 2. Evidence of culturally relevant and responsive instructional practices to bolster student engagement and increase school community awareness/involvement. 3. Increase student graduation rate for SY 2018-2019. 4.. To increase parent engagement by collaborating and creating various school and community events to increase parent awareness and participation within the school community. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 18K642 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 278 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 20 19 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 13 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 76.0% % Attendance Rate 71.9% % Reduced Lunch 21.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 11.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 7.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.21 0% 22% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 69% 46% 49.4% 2.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 73 71 2 79.7% 2.5% 19.1% 77.3% 1.8% 1.1% 2 26% N/A N/A N/A 68% 62% 74.0% 4% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review and analysis of student performance trends, including findings from the June 2018 Regents data and other relevant (qualitative and quantitative) data shows the need to provide targeted professional development workshops for all teachers in order to improve and strengthen pedagogical skills around task complexity and difficulty. Strengths Lesson plans and unit plans demonstrate evidence of alignment to CCLS and instructional shifts. Instructional objectives are coherent and aligned to academic tasks and assessment practices.    Unit plans include grade level Common Core State Standards and follow the NYC DoE High School Scope and Sequence, and the Common Core Instructional Shifts.  Administrators used the Tri State Quality Review Rubric to ensure instructional objectives are observable,  measurable and sequentially appropriate. Incorporating personalized instructional supports into lesson plans that highlight scaffolding, learning strategies for individuals and groups of students.  Use of collectible assessment products to gauge student mastery of content and skills on a daily basis. Priority Needs  The item analysis for the Regents assessments demonstrate that students consistently have a deficiency in literacy and numeracy skills.  On the Quality Guide Report, 39% of students say they are challenged in class. Strengthening teacher practice around rigor (level of difficulty and complexity content/standard-based-skills) to create fluent student readers and writers across subjects.  Ensure all curricula emphasize the school-wide instructional focus of reading, writing, and content-specific vocabulary.  Provide targeted professional development on content knowledge and pedagogical skill.  Guidance and subject area collaboration to support student academic and social-emotional needs. On the School Quality Guide report, only 42% of the students felt teachers supported them when they were upset.  The Quality Guide Report reflected that teachers said that 47% of the students did their work when they were supposed to. Part 2 – Annual Goal 3  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 25% increase in graduation rates by implementing rigorous instruction aligned to the common core and regents standards, as evidenced by the school progress report. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The Principal, Assistant Principals and Guidance Counselor will review Cohort data to identify students who could benefit from individualized action plans. Students in Cohort U Guidance Counselor will do a individual transcript reviews for Cohort U so students are aware of graduation requirements. The Principal, Assistant Principals and teachers will analyze June 2018 Regents and Regents Items Skill Analysis to identify gaps, adjust curriculum maps, creating instructional coherence aligned to state curricula. Students in Cohort U Teacher: SWD, Social studies, ESL, Math, Science Midterm and final exams will be created for each Regents class that align to Regents expectations. Daily informal assessments will be used to progress toward the Regents. Data will be analyzed 6 times per year, aligned with the marking period, to determine student progress towards the standards. Teacher: SWD, Social studies, ESL, Math, Science The Special Education teachers will meet regularly with content area teachers to collaborate, review lesson plans, create modifications and accommodations to meet individual student needs. SWD September 2018 -June 2019 September 2018 -June 2019 September 2018 -June 2019 September 2018 -June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 We have a number of students who are English Language Learners (ELL). ESL teachers will ensure to implement culturally responsive literature and teaching practices to include reading, writing, speaking and listening skills. Teachers will focus on increasing the English speaking proficiency and reading skills of students by front loading vocabulary, peer to peer instructional teams to teach comprehension. Teachers English Language Learners September 2018- June 2019 Administrators will provide oversight. Guidance Counselors will Administrators will provide oversight. Administrators will provide oversight. Teachers will implement ongoing related activities. Administrators will provide direction and oversight. Teachers will implement ongoing related activities. Administrative staff will provide ongoing direction and oversight. Teacher teams will lead meetings to improve student outcomes. Principal and Assistant Principal will oversee this initiative. The ESL teacher will collaborate with subject area teachers. 5 will differentiate instruction to address the various proficiency levels. Guidance Counselors will facilitate classroom presentations to work with students on healthy social and academic habits. Students will engage in peer to peer group activities to foster good work habits that translate into positive behaviors that can be utilized inside and outside of the school community. Students will problem solve and contribute to peer discussion and activities to provide a supportive environment for all students. Good peer to peer and school staff relationships are linked to improved literacy skills when students have healthy emotional well being and strong support systems. Economically disadvantaged/Students in temporary housing September 2018- June 2019 The Administrators will provide oversight. Guidance Counselors will collaborate with teachers to implement this initiative. Staff will work collaboratively to build norms around high expectations to support rigorous instruction. All Students Parents will attend ongoing conferences to learn how they can partner in additional ways for the academic and social success of their children. They will learn specific strategies that can translate into positive student outcomes. Parents September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 The Administrators will provide oversight. Guidance Counselors will collaborate with teachers to implement this initiative. The Administrative staff will oversee this initiative. Parent Coordinator, and PCT teachers will implement this intiative. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We just purchased Kinvolved which allows staff to directly communicate with families in a variety of languages. Teachers can directly interface with parents/families to strategically discuss academic goals, standards and progress, creating a two-way accountability for a child's progress. We will have conferences with parents to discuss student transcripts and create individualized action plans based upon current student performance. We will host parent workshops that focus on educating parents on subject specific expectations and graduation requirements. Other areas of focus include hosting computer work sessions to assist parents in creating an e mail address and web browsing for information. Results from the parent survey will drive additional workshops throughout the school year. CBOs will be asked to provide workshops on topics of interest. We will collect parent e-mails to send regular communication regarding school and community events as well as student progress information. Parents will receive a copy of the city-wide discipline code, class specific course syllabi along with a calendar of events and important school dates. The Parent Association and the Parent Coordinator will 6  provide additional resources specific to the needs of our families. The Principal will provide oversight of parental activities and involvement through collaboration with the PTA and Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. OTPS funding (Tax Levy, Title 1 SWP) will support parent outreach and school wide events throughout the school year. OTPS funding (Title III, Part A and Title III Immigrant) will be utilized to outreach and support parents who speak languages other than English. Monday Professional Development time will be utilized along with Tuesday Family Engagement time. Per session will be allocated for after school social and academic events that includes parent involvement. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In October 2018 students will engage in a midterm exam that will gauge student readiness to the Regents. In December 2018, eligible students will engage in a mock Regents exam to gauge student readiness toward the New York State Regents examination for January 2019. At the end of January 2019, we will review the progress to graduation tracker to assess student progress toward graduation to see a 13% increase in on track to graduation. In February 2019 students will engage in a midterm exam that will gauge student readiness to the Regents. In May 2019, eligible students will engage in a mock Regents exam to gauge student readiness toward the New York State Regents examination for June 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 1. Progress to graduation tool 2. Common Core Regents results 3. Regents aligned Midterm exam results Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The School Quality Guide (2017-2018) reflected a decline in percentage in the area of Supportive Environment. In an effort to foster a more supportive environment, we will continue to build a coherent set of instructional practices across grades and subject areas that emphasize high expectations around levels of student participation, thinking skills, and class discussion, so that a diversity of learners are engaged in rigorous habits and higher order thinking (QR 1.2). In addition, we have embedded into our school’s schedule a grade specific monthly town hall meeting, facilitated by our guidance department as a platform to address concerns and issues that are current and relevant such as the impact of chronic absenteeism, biased-based harassment/bullying, discussing high expectations and goal setting, and academic awareness. We seek to embed cultural relevant pedagogy and a culturally responsive environmental to bolster student outcomes. Strengths  Grade 9 – 12 Inquiry Teams  Content & Grade Team Leaders  Providing Individual Teachers their Scholarship per MP  Extra-Curricular Activities, including athletic teams  Restorative Justice Practices Priority needs  New York City Quality Guide Survey reflected that 42% of students responded that their teachers supported them when they were upset.  New York City Quality Guide Survey reflected that 53% of students responded that their teachers notice if they have trouble learning something.  New York City Quality Guide Survey reflected that 47% of students responded that students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate other students at their schools.  New York City Quality Guide Survey reflected that 40% of the students indicated that students behave well even when the teacher isn't watching.  Only 60% of teachers have acquired the skills to effectively analyze classroom and student level data to create 4-6 weeks instructional plans that are personalized to identify and support student strengths and weaknesses Part 2 – Annual Goal 8  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Urban Action Academy chronic absenteeism will show a reduction by 5% as measured by the 2019 attendance data through creating a school wide attendance initiative. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Establish an attendance team that meets weekly. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018-June 2019 Attendance Teacher, School Aides, Parent Coordinators Utilizing grade team teacher's professional periods weekly to identify at risk students to discuss strategies to personalize student support. All teachers September 2018-June 2019 The partnership with The Center for Court Innovations will allow the CBO staff to push into selected classes, model restorative practices and train the students and staff on these practices. This will create a culturally responsive structure to assist with various conflicts or stress factors that negatively impact school climate, while building a stronger community at UAA with an emphasis on attendance improvement. 11th and 12th graders will be tapped to be trained to take on peer leadership roles. Peer leaders will facilitate group circles with teacher advisers. Subject area Teachers, Students, Administrative September 2018-June 2019 staff School staff will work collaboratively to create norms and expectations around common practices that will be implemented throughout the classrooms. All subject area teachers, Guidance Counselor September 2018-June 2019 The student government provides students with a healthy platform to advocate, participate and collaborate with the school community with an emphasis on attendance improvement. The teacher will serve as adviser to student leaders where they will engage in an election process where each grade will be represented to ensure all students have a voice in the school community. Students will meet monthly with Teachers, Administrative staff, elected students from each grade level Monthly September 2018-June 2019 0 Administrative staff will provide direction and oversight. Attendance team will implement initiative. Administrative staff will provide direction and oversight. teachers will implement this initiative. Administrative staff, Peer Collaborative Teachers Content Leaders, CBO partnership from CCI Administrative staff will provide direction and oversight. All school staff will implement this initiative. Administrative staff will oversee this initiative and the teacher will implement it. the the administration to discuss various topics of interest and concern. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Coordinator with the assistance of the Parent Association will host monthly meetings where they will receive a calendar of events along with school updates regarding Supportive Environment. Parents will also receive a survey to gauge their ideas and feelings to ensure a more supportive school environment. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session funds will cover the costs of teachers to host PA meetings. Coverage funding may be needed for Student government meetings. Title II (Part A) and Title III Immigrant Funds will be utilized to support per session allocations for teachers to work with families who are speakers of languages other than English. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monthly review of chronic absenteeism rate and overall school wide attendance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will be using reports from ATS. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An exploration of the Framework for Great Schools indicates the need for increased interdepartmental and campus collaboration to create opportunities for interdisciplinary learning experiences and systematic dissemination of departmental initiatives that include best practices. The School Quality Guide (2017-2018) found that 59% teachers felt that they had an opportunity to work collaboratively with teachers from other schools. Urban Action Academy is co-located with four other schools that have many same subject teachers. We encourage our teachers to be autonomous in their learning by taking a leadership role to organize, facilitate, learn and turn key professional development. We want our teachers to take advantage of the resource opportunities that exist on our school campus. Strengths: Monthly instructional cabinet meetings Common grading policy Ongoing professional development Grade Team Meetings Content Team Meetings Priority needs Conflict with scheduling interdepartmental inter-visitations Finding a online grading system and strengthening teacher usage of said system to plan instruction and revise curriculum The Quality School Report found that 67% of students say that their teachers make the lessons relevant to their everyday life experiences. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Peer Collaborative Teachers will meet with teams of teachers to establish research based best practices to improve teacher practice as measured by an 10% increase Regents. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal will hold regular meetings with the PCTs (weekly to bi-weekly) to review current data, scope and sequence, standards, and ongoing data analysis to improve current pedagogical practices. Principal will assign each PCT a number of teachers to work more intensively with on individualized plans. All subject area teachers September 2018- June 2019 PCTs will lead weekly inquiry meetings by department to consistently analyze data to create focus and urgency, improve pedagogical practices, and ultimately Regents data. PCT September 2018- June 2019 All teachers will participate in a minimum of two inter-visitations a semester within UAA or campus classrooms. At least 2 teachers will be asked to go on Showcase school visits to see promising practices within the DOE portfolio of schools. All subject teachers Teachers will meet once a week for grade inquiry meetings during common planning time to collaborate, create and monitor student personalized learning strategies. All teachers. Students all grades. September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Principal will provide direction and oversight. PCTs will implement. Principal and APs will provide direction and oversight. PCTs and teachers will implement. Administrative staff will provide oversight. All subject area teachers. Administrative team will provide oversight. All subject area teachers will participate. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed about the grade inquiry meetings and their purpose. Parents will be invited to conferences throughout the school year. Moreover, parents will be kept abreast of outcomes and how they can be involved. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Coverage pay will be allocated to release teachers staff for inter-visitation, as necessary. 4  Per diem will be allocated to release teachers staff for Showcase school visits. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Each 6 weeks, marking period data will be used to measure student progress in attaining credits and knowledge. In October and March, mid term assessments will be used to measure student progress. In January and June, Regents data and credit accumulation will be used to measure student progress. In January-Progress toward graduation tracker. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Regents data STARS Scholarship Data Midterm examination data Progress toward graduation tracker Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2017-2018 school year, teachers took the lead in making decisions for the school's use of MoSL. They played a key role in shaping the decision making regarding assessments. There were three Peer Collaborative Teachers who lead the professional development every week. The School Quality Guide (2018-2017) 91% of the teachers responded favorably around Peer Collaboration. It is those collaborations where teachers took leadership roles to improve the school environment. We will continue to use teachers in lead positions to positively affect student outcome. Strength:  The School Quality Guide (2017-2018) found that 78% teachers felt responsible for student learning.  The School Quaility Guide (2017-2018) found 90% of teachers say that the principal makes clear to the staff his or her expectations for meeting instructional goals Priority needs  The School Quality Guide (2017-2018) found that 48% of teachers say that they have influence over the selection of instructional materials used in classrooms.  The School Quality Guide (2017-2018) found that 57% of teachers say that the principal participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers.  The School Quality Guide (2017-2018) found that 62%of teachers say that the principal sets clear expectations for teachers about implementing what they have learned in professional development. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the principal will increase staff capacity by developing professional development plans that meet individual staff needs to improve regents performance by 10%. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Principal will meet with lead teachers and Peer Collaborative teachers to review curriculum and professional development expectations. These expectations and feedback will be reviewed with all teachers during pre/post observation conferences. Lead teachers October 2018 to June 2019 The administrative cabinet will norm instructional expectations through Danielson Rubric and conduct regular instructional walkthroughs. Administrative Cabinet September2018 to June 2019 The Principal will provide direction and oversight. The Assistant Principals will implement this initiative. The Principal will provide direction and oversight. The Assistant Principals will implement this initiative. Each subject area and grade level teacher will have a Lead Teacher who will spear-head the teacher's work around instructional conversations, analysis of student work, formal and informal assessments to collaborate and share the responsibility for student achievement. Grade and Subject area lead teachers The Peer Collaborative Teachers will plan and facilitate weekly professional development to all teachers. This team will work in collaboration with the administration to provide professional development to target teacher development and interests that includes priority areas identified in the needs assessment to improve student achievement. Peer Collaborative Teachers October 2018 to June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals will provide oversight. Subject and grade Area lead teacher will implement the activities. October 2018 to June 2019 Principal Throughout the school year, engaging all staff in discussing how the school is progressing, whether this be in group discussions, via surveys or in personal conversations. Additionally, encouraging staff to take on leadership roles in areas of their strength (i.e. encouraging a teacher to step up All staff October 2018 to June 2019 7 Assistant Principals will provide oversight. Peer collaborative Teachers will implement the activities. All staff-- Administration will engage in a variety methods to gauge to run student activities). This will build collective responsibility, while providing necessary feedback for improvement to the administration. staff interest and ideas. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will inform and discuss these teacher leadership roles with the Parent's Association and School Leadership Team and will include them in progress toward outcomes. We will encourage actionable feedback to be implemented. Holding PTA workshops and events that align with this goal. Principal and the Parent Coordinator is in charge of this effort. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Common planning time and professional development occurs during the staff regular day. Per session will be allocated for subject/grade level lead teachers new to the role to support delivering professional development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Regents data Review Danielson data Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1. Regents data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Parents are an essential partnership that the school relies upon as one of the largest avenues to effectively engage and support students. UAA comprises a large immigrant population whose families are not native speakers of English. We are sensitive to the unique structures of our families and the complexities that may be associated with it. Strengths  Families have reported favorably in the School Quality Guide 2017-2018, that Urban Action Academy staff regularly communicate with them and share updates regarding their child and school information.  The Administration and school staff share a strong commitment to being creative in ways to increase parent engagement in meaningful partnerships connected to student outcomes.  The Administration takes into account cultural elements that can impact how and when parents can be involved through physical presence.  Parents are viewed as a strong pillar in the UAA community and we will accept family support in a variety of ways that can lead to positive student outcomes.  85% of families say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn.  94% of families say that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit their school.  89% of families say that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from their school. Priority needs  The School Quality Guide reported that 49% parents responded that they had an opportunity to volunteer their time at school.  Parent involvement remains a struggle for our school. While parents are responsive on the phone and via e-mail, it has been a challenge to get parents into the building. We want to cultivate a school environment where parents have both a voice and personal involvement.  Only 20% of the parents completed the School Quality Guide Survey (2017-2018).  Lack of community partnerships aligned to the school to provide enrichment for families and overall school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 9  By June 2019, we will increase family engagement to empower our families to advocate for their children and engage in educational decision making as measured by a 20% increase in the parent survey completion. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Tuesday afternoons have been scheduled for teachers to make phone calls, e mails, write letters to our families and planning time for parent events. Grade level teachers will organize monthly events to increase parent involvement and parent voice. We will have ongoing events for parents to attend throughout the school year. Parents and Guardians October 2018 to June 2019 Resources will be provided for parents through our school's Welcome Center. We will designate computers and a printing station for parents who need access to the World Wide Web. The Welcome Center can assist with resume support, NYC ID, housing research, location of food pantry and other resources of interest for families. Parents and Guardians September 2018 to June 2018 The Parent Coordinator and the PA President will facilitate ongoing workshops that will empower families to advocate and support their children. Parents and Guardians October 2018 to June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal will provide oversight to this initiative. All teachers will implement this activity. Principal and Assistant Principal will provide oversight to this initiative. Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor and Attendance Teacher will implement this activity. Principal and Assistant Principal will provide direction and oversight to this initiative. Parent Coordinator and PA President will implement this initiative. Kinvolve and other tools will be utilized to ensure that all parents, including those whose native language is other than English, are aware of the school opportunities to give feedback and solicit assistance. During the time leading to the School ELL parents and Guardians October 2018 to June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal will provide 1 Quality Survey, we will increase communication in targeted home languages to ensure all parents can participate in the survey. oversight to this initiative. Parent Coordinator will implement this initiative. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Our Parent Coordinator is in the process of identifying new CBO partnerships to support parent/family and community engagement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title III, Part A and Title III Immigrant funds will be utilized to pay per session to teachers for communicating with, and engaging families whose first language is other than English, to allow for the guidance team and teachers to meet with parents after-school, or during the weekend to discuss the progress of their children or attend school wide events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. An increase in 5%parent participation as evidenced by: Sign-in sheets from parent workshops Sign-in sheets from community speaker presentations    Weekly call and visitor logs   Kinvolve data Short surveys results from workshops and guest speakers Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Quality Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group tutoring When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Tuesdays and Thursdays period 6 tutoring, after school academic support (Wednesdays – Fridays) Small group tutoring Tuesdays and Thursdays period 6 tutoring, after school academic support (Wednesdays – Fridays) Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Focus on command of evidence from text: paired passages; Use of evidence from sources to inform and make an argument through close reading; Building Academic Vocabulary, Development of Reading and Writing Skills Developing a deep understanding of mathematical concepts through fluency and application Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) End of Unit Exams Regents Results Grade & Content Team recommendations Scored 1 or 2 on ELA and Math Performance Assessment Decile score Lowest 3rd Score End of Unit Exams Regents Results Grade & Content Team recommendation Scored 1 or 2 ELA and Math Performance Assessment Decile score Lowest 3rd Score 3  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) End of Unit Exams Regents Results Grade & Content Team recommendation Scored 1 or 2 ELA and Math Performance Assessment Decile score Lowest 3rd Score End of Unit Exams Regents Results Grade & Content Team recommendation Scored 1 or 2 ELA and Math Performance Assessment Decile score Lowest 3rd Score End of Unit Exams Regents Results Grade & Content Team recommendation Scored 1 or 2 ELA and Math Performance Assessment Small group tutoring Use of evidence from sources to inform and make an argument through close reading Tuesdays and Thursdays period 6 tutoring, after school academic support (Wednesdays – Fridays) Small group tutoring Using Text Based Evidencefrom sources to inform or construct an argument Tuesdays and Thursdays period 6 tutoring, after school academic support (Wednesdays – Fridays) Small group tutoring Tuesdays and Thursdays period 6 tutoring, after school academic support (Wednesdays – Fridays) Small group and individual counseling ( before, during and after school), family counseling ( before, during and after school) academic and career counseling ( before, during and after Decile score Lowest 3rd Score 4  Students who exhibit behaviorconcerns, Students who are mandated for counseling services 5  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Students will receive academic intervention supports, guidance support, medical care and metal health services, and materials for daily school functionality. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The coordination and integration of Federal, State, and Local funds is one we take seriously. In our effort to consolidate these funds, we have identified 20 students who fall under the Students in Temporary Housing (STH) status. As a school community, we immediately intervene when we learn of any student who experience any form of difficulties, whether it is with mastering grade level proficiency standards, housing or nutrition. Some of the strategies and processes we have used and will continue to use to ensure timely and effective use of the consolidated funds are:  The Pupil Personnel Team, which includes the Social Worker and guidance counselor, whom meet weekly to discus and share information about at-risk students, and referral received from teachers through our referral process, and the support available. The Parent Coordinator will schedule monthly workshops that focus on housing, immigration, health & nutrition and family literary services.  The Guidance Counselors and Assistant Principal working collaboratively in conducting workshops about the available City and Community Programs, supported under the ESEA, including violence prevention programs, adult education, vocational & technical education, and job training skills. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 6 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. -N/A 7  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  The DoE uses the Mentoring program/plan to assign and identify mentors for teachers where the can engage in supportive professional development targeted toward teacher retention and development.  We will attend hiring fairs for ongoing recruitment.  The Administrative staff will provide mentors to create support plans for struggling and new teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  Peer Collaborative Teachers and administration will attend ongoing professional development, to ensure they are up to date with current and ongoing access to quality professional development, to turnkey best practices.  Principal and Assistant Principals will facilitate professional development for all staff titles.  The administrative staff and Peer Collaborative Teachers will create professional development plans to target all teacher levels.  The Borough Field Support Center will be a resource for ESL teachers to engage and learn strategies to improve student achievement.  The Administrative staff will attend ongoing professional development through the Superintendent's office, Borough Field Support Center and other outside opportunities.  The Administrators on the campus will collaborate to share subject specific professional development opportunities and grade specific opportunities for teachers and Para Professionals. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 8  n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Not applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers collaborate in content teams to plan and develop Regents based common assessments and rubrics. A Measure of Student Learning (MOSL) committee is created to share in the decision making of what assessments will be used to ultimately determine student growth. Professional development of teachers is based on need assessed through classroom observations, evaluating data-driven lesson plans and delivery and reviewing teacher created assessments. Workshops are planned and provided by the Administration inclusive of the Peer Collaborative Teachers. The decision to focus on high need instructional areas is decided collectively and monthly with the Administration and teacher leads. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Funding Amount Indicate the amount Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and 9  Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 173,854.00 0 12,366.00 0 1,930,114.00 x - x - x Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5E Part 4b Section 5C Part 4b - Section 5E Part 4b Section 5C Part 4b - Section 5E Part 4b, Section 5D Part 4b Section 5C Part 4b 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 0  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 1  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Urban Action Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Urban Action Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology for students to be college and career ready; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can successfully support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 3  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Urban Action Academy , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement 4  between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 5  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 6  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 7  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 8 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Differentiated instruction to ELL students in grades 9-12 through targeted proficiency Rigorous and reasonable expectations based on students’ learning styles, linguistic and Begin description here: The rationale for the before and after school ENL program is to improve English language learners ’ academic and linguistic s outcomes in content areas. This program will provide ELL with the proficiency skills needed to meet and exceed the requirements for high school graduation. The focus of the direct instruction will be on literacy and linguistic proficiency in preparation for the NYSESLAT and to obtain passing grades on the ELA Regents exams. An additional objective of the program is that the proficiency levels of ELL students will increase 1-2 levels by the end of the school year 2019. An ENL teacher will work collaboratively with licensed literacy teachers to design, identify, and implement differentiated instructional activities and resources that will enhance the ELL students’ acquisition and mastery of the 4 linguistic skills. The languages of instruction will be English, French, Haitian Creole, Spanish, and Arabic. Oral and written culturally responsive instructional techniques, resources, translations, technological instructional aids and explanations will also be available for students. Time allocations for planning will also be provided for the teachers. SCHEDULE: The before and after school ENL program will provide : · based content aligned activities · academic needs · Instruction in English. French, Haitian Creole, Spanish, and Arabic will be used as a resource based on the academic and linguistic levels and &nbsp;needs of the ELL students. · Daily direct classroom instruction before school instruction from 7:30 am-8:10 am and daily direct after school instruction from 2:30 pm-3:30 pm beginning October 2018 and ending &nbsp;in June 2019. The classes will be taught by 2 licensed ESL instructors. MATERIALS: Students will utilize Chrome books to access STEAM/STEM literacy websites aligned with content area themes. The ENL instructors will customize the website resources and materials based on the ELL students linguistic and content area needs. Classroom activities will be monitored and immediate feedback will be given to the students. The resource materials will include: Flocabulary www.flocabulary.com www.ESLlibrary.com Upfront New York Times Magazines, online student and teacher resources https://upfront.scholastic.com www.newsela.com www.tweentribune.com 0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information New Readers Press Texts (Intermediate and Advanced levels) 20 Chrome books College and Careers http://www.flocabulary.com/unit/paying-for-college/ Paying for College https://www.flocabulary.com/unit/paying-for-college/ Global History Quizlet Sheltered English Strategies https://quizlet.com/18616400/global-history-regents-review-flash-cards/ Global History & Geography Regents Review by Sean Carrig and Gus Egan on iBooks. (Sheltered English Approach) https://shop.elitereaders.com/book/636822138/global-history-geography-regents-review Student Loans https://www.flocabulary.com/unit/student-loans/ rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: The rationale for the school’s professional development program is that there is an increasing cultural diversity in our student population and the movement toward globalization and these trends require that instructors develop 21st century in-depth understanding of the ways in which the different socio-linguistic cultural backgrounds of students impact upon their acquisition mastery of academic concepts. All Urban Action Academy HS teachers and administrators will receive training the 2nd Wednesday of each month from 2:35 pm-3:50 pm beginning in October 2018 to June 2019. ENL teachers and designated designated literacy coaches will the providers at the professional development workshops. Topics To Be Covered OCTOBER 2018: STRATEGIES FOR ELL INSTRUCTION: Vocabulary and Language Development: Writing English As Second Language: new concepts and key vocabulary words will be introduced through the use of hands on and visual instructional aids . 1  Part C: Professional Development NOVEMBER 2018:IDENTIFYING AND ADDRESSING THE ACADEMIC NEEDS OF ELLS: Guided Interaction: lessons will be structured to enable students to work collaboratively with their peers and the paraprofessional to acquire and enhance their use of the 4 linguistic skills in the content area. DECEMBER 2018:EXPLICIT INSTRUCTION ICE Reading English As A Second Language direct teaching of concepts, academic language, and reading comprehension strategies to complete classroom tasks. This will help students to understand what is being asked of them. JANUARY 2019/FEBRUARY 2019: Culturally Responsive & Context-Based Learning: Implement students’ interests and real-life examples to help them gain interest in the subject matter. Research shows that when students can make self to world and self to text connections, there is an increase in their level of motivation and interest. MARCH 2019:Technological Instructional Aides & Internet Resources : Strategies and instructional aides including, but not limited to Chrome books and Internet based STEM/STEAM technologies will be integrated into the content areas to enhance the ELL students use of English. Flocabulary and the ESL Library will be introduced. APRIL 2019: DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION FOR ELLS-PART 2: Identifying and providind services to bilingual special education students. MAY 2019/JUNE 2019: Assessing Cognitive Academic Linguistic Proficiency (CALP) vs. Basic Interpersonal Communicative Skills (BICS) a variety of proficiency based formative and summative instruments of assessments will be used to evaluate the ELL students’ acquisition, mastery, progress and outcomes of the 4 linguistic skills in the content areas. rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: Parental Involvement. The ELL parents will participate in bilingual family workshops to explore college and careers through content project based learning assignments, college tours, family city sightseeing cultural excursions and live and virtual web based bilingual seminars and webinars. The rationale for the family literacy college and careers component of the program is that immigrant parents are often unfamiliar with the skills and procedures that their children need in preparation for college and careers in the 21st century. This component of the program would provide outreach activities that would enable immigrant families to become active participants in the education of their children. Activities would be scheduled bi-weekly on Thursdays and they would take place during afternoon (2:30 pm-3:30 pm) and evening hours (5:00 pm-6:30 pm). The workshop providers would include bilingual college representatives, bilingual counselors, and presenters. Parents would be notified via bilingual phone blasts, emails, and notifications 2  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities translated in their home language. During the registration process, LEP parents of newly admitted ELL students will meet with a bilingual pedagogue who is fluent in their home language including but not limited to Haitian Creole, French, Spanish or Arabic. The parent coordinator, Ms. Tamara Bradford, will also collaborate with the bilingual pedagogue to ensure that bilingual parents receive PTA orientation materials, inclusive of a video presentation in their home language which provides them with information concerning school wide activities and the various English language learning programs that are available for their child. Interpretation services from the Department of Education will be provided to parents and all correspondences, phone blasts, and fliers will be provided in the language indicated on the home language survey that was completed by the ELL students’ parents and/or guardians. SCHEDULE AND DURATION Topic: Title III Information Session for Parents and Guardians Rationale: Parents will have the opportunity to meet, greet, eat, obtain information in an informal setting Provider: Ms. Burlingame & Ms. Bradford Date: September /October 2018 Hours: 1. 5 hours Audience: Parents of ELL students Topic: Bilingual Parent Surveys Rationale: ELL parents will participate in a virtual tour of the school’s website. They will also have the opportunity to complete the parent survey, communicate with their child’s teachers. Provider: Ms. Bradford & Ms. Desroches Date: November 2018 Hours: 1. 5 hours Audience: Parents of ELL students Topic: Introducing College Programs Rationale: Identifying & Analyzing students' Interests, needs, goals Provider: COSA, Ms. Crippen Date: December 2018 Hours: 1. 5 hours Audience: Parents of ELL students Topic: Immigration and Your Rights Rationale: Scholarship, Citizenship and Financial Aid Programs Provider: Representative from the Office of Immigration Date: January 2019 Hours: 1. 5 hours Audience: Parents of ELL students Topic: NYSESLAT Information Session for Parents Rationale: Celebrating Student Achievements: Awards Ceremony and Refreshments Provider: Ms. Burlingame, Ms. Bradford, Dr. Isom, Ms. Desroches Date: February 2019 Hours: 1. 5 hours Audience: Parents of ELL students Topic: Meeting High School Graduation Requirements 3  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Rationale: To provide parents with Regents translation resources and instructional aides that will empower and assist their children in meeting high school graduation requirements. Provider: Big Word Translation Representatives Date: March/April 2019 Hours: 1. 5 hours Audience: Parents of ELL students Topic: Family Day Excursion to the Statue of Liberty Rationale: Making Cross Cultural Connections From the Inner-City Provider: CitySighting Tour Date: May/June 2019 Hours: TBA Audience: Parents of ELL students Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL n/a n/a n/a n/a 4  5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 18 School Name Urban Action Academy Borough Brooklyn School Number 642 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Fareeda Iris Garcia Coach Keiya Smith ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Allison Burlingame Teacher/Subject Area Sandy Faiella Teacher/Subject Area Novella Bobb Related-Service Provider Dr. Lotto Superintendent Michael Prayor Assistant Principal Ronda Razak Coach Nina Coates School Counselor Marsha Desroches Parent Simone Dandridge Parent Coordinator Tamarra Bradford Field Support Center Staff Member Sourette Fougere Other (Name and Title) Dr.Deborah Isom A.P. LOTE/ESL C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 270 6 Total number of ELLs 71 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 26.30%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Newly admitted ELLs are administered the NYSITELL, which assesses their ENL skills. Once results are analyzed, students are then properly placed within the adequate amount of required time, i.e. 180, 360, or 540 minutes per week according to their skill level, basic, intermediate, or advanced respectively. The four linguistic skills (reading, writing, listening, and speaking) are are evaluated using summative and formative assessments. Proficiency based and regents aligned assessments are administered bi-weekly. Baseline and power assessments that are aligned with standards are ongoing and teachers collaborate daily during their common prep periods to discuss and evaluate student outcomes, develop and enhance the students' comprehension skills in reading and writing thorough the use of close reading strategies and front loading vocabulary. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 7  During Content Team meetings, teachers identify and create content based sheltered English resources and strategies that are aligned with the content area standards and curriculum. Teachers also work collaboratively to develop baseline assessments that enable the students to apply their linguistic skills in reading, writing and analyzing . After administering the baseline assessments, teachers analyze, discuss data for the purpose of identifying areas of need. Based on this analysis, teachers modify the instructional strategies and resources in their lessons to ensure that the academic and linguistic needs of the students are met. Teachers work collaboratively to develop and implement individual plans of support that address the learning styles and academic needs of the students. The data of student outcomes on formative and summative assessments will be crossed referenced, analyzed and discussed. Ongoing modifications and updates will be made based on student outcomes and progress. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We measure the success of our ENL program based on ELLs' performance on the previous year's NYSESLAT, REGENTS exams, as well as on baseline assessments created by every teacher in all their core subject classes. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teachers increase the personalization of the differentiated instructional strategies and resources and that they implement in their lesson. Teachers specify the content based and linguistic strategies used for each student based on their academic and linguistic levels. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT and NYSITELL data show that the ELLs are making incremental gains on the assessment and that they are progressing to higher proficiency levels in English. ELLs who are newcomer are place in the beginning level based on their score on the NYSESLAT. In addition, a group of students who were on the ESL beginner's level receive additional instruction in the period zero and period 9 ESL classes offered during those periods. Proficiency based linguistic instructional strategies and sheltered English instruction in the target language reading and writing are aligned with the content areas. ENL dictionaries, Flocabulary, Internet based programs, ESL library lessons, chrome books, electronic journals, Upfront magazine, maps and visuals instructional cards are implemented as part of the instruction. The teacher includes phonetic awareness activities to improve language skills. After reviewing the NYSESLAT data, the patterns revealed are:ELLs tend to develop their speaking and listening skills faster than they do reading and writing, which are skills that take longer to master. Most ELLs tend to progress from basic to intermediate levels faster than they do from intermediate to advanced; however, once they reach the advanced level, a significant number tends to take longer to test as proficient, which is not surprising, since Second Language Acquisition research shows that it can take many years until proficiency is achieved.As far as grades are concerned, the majority of our students have been passing their core-subject classes. Students who have failed classes have been attending Academic Intervention Services to practice skills in the subjects they need help with. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ELA Content Team, along with PCTs meet once a week to analyze data. They then conduct lesson and unit plans tuning protocols to ensure that ELLs receive personalized differentiated instruction with the goal of moving to proficient and commanding linguistic levels. Parents and staff members members also receive updates at conferences, meetings, and notifications. Part IV: ELL Programming 8  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students have daily ESL classes according to their proficiency levels, i.e. 540 minutes/week for entering, 360 minutes/week for emerging, and 180 minutes/week for transitioning and expanding, and 90 minutes/week for commanding level ELLs Classes are not graded and heterogeneous, i.e. levels are divided into: beginners and low intermediate; high intermediate and advanced. Also, a Global History class as well as a Living Environment class is taught within a co teaching and push-in model.For SY 18-19, the ENL teacher will have 3 stand alone ESL classes and will be pushing into 2 ELA classes.All 3 ESL classes, i.e. low-intermediate and intermediate-advanced, are not graded and heterogeneous. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students receive from 180+ to 540+ minutes a week of ESL classes. They also receive support in Global History and Living Environment classes through both collaborative teaching, and push- in taught by Ms. Burlingame, our licensed ESL teacher. In fact, since our classes last about 47 minutes and meet five times a week, ELLs are scheduled to receive weekly instruction as follows:- Entering students receive 540 minutes of ESL instruction - Emerging- 360 minutes/week- Transitioning- 180 minutes weekly of ESL instruction - Expanding- 180 minutes weekly ESL instruction- Commanding-90 minutes of weekly ESL instruction Students receive mandated units for the duration of the entire 2017-18 school year. Our program contains 71 students in all 4 grades, and they range from beginners to advanced.In addition, an additional period 9 class (ESL Level 1) was added during term 1 of SY 17-18.For SY 18-19 the licensed ESL teacher will now co-teach two ELA classes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The foci for the sessions are: literacy needs of ELLs; differentiated instruction; inquiry model, scaffolded instruction with the support of technology in the teaching and learning of ELLs.Since the school offers a ESL program, students receive ESL instruction during their ESL classes and push-in to Global Studies classes from Monday through Friday. Urban Action Academy has been implementing the rigor of the Common Core Learning Standards since the 2012-2013 school year across subjects, with focus on College Readiness. Collaborative planning between ESL and other subject areas also occur during content team and grade team level meetings, during discussions on the following topics take place: § Scaffolding is an essential part of the instructional delivery, such as modeling and bridging, schema building, contextualization, text representative and metacognition. § Assisting ELLs during class periods through buddy, conferencing with students in and out of class, informal assessments, and running records. § Additional small-group AIS sessions for students for class work and homework assistance as well as Regents review with a focus on literacy and academic language as per CCLS. Beyond ESL instruction with emphasis on literary and informational texts covering different subject areas, collaboration between teachers means that there is a consideration for the language needs of ELLs. Some aspects of this policy include: §Content area teachers monitor the understanding of linguistically challenging material and use a variety of vocabulary support such as use of picture and bilingual dictionaries to clarify meaning. § Math teachers devote extra class time to decipher difficult word problems, and require students to make written and oral explanations of the problems they work on. § Social Studies, Science, and ELA teachers 9  scaffold their instruction with visual aids such as graphs, video clips, Internet, maps, atlases, and meaningful illustrations to increase comprehensionIn addition, the workshop model allows for group work, station learning, and one on one conferencing with the teacher. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students are evaluated by taking the LAB-B when they are first admitted. Since the LAB-R is offered in English and Spanish, speakers of other languages take the LAB-R in English. They are not evaluated in their native languages during the academic year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A) Plan for SIFE studentsIn order to provide the services they need, SIFE students see Ms. Burlingame during his AIS classes for additional support. Each SIFE has an individualized AIS plan based on a needs assessment that focuses on literacy and numeracy. Teachers will continue to be trained in differentiation methods and strategies. We also rely on the assistance of a Creole speaking paraprofessional. B) Plan for Newcomers When a new student registers at Urban Action Academy, we provide the following resources to facilitate the transition: - student orientation- buddy system where we have assigned advanced and former ELLs to help beginner ELLs as part of their community service hours C)Plan for ELLs receiving service 4 to 6 years The plan for our ELLs receiving service four to six years is to target reading and writing instruction during their AIS sessions as well as their ESL and/or Global History and ELA classes. D) Plan for Long Term ELLs The plan for our long term ELLs is to target reading and writing instruction; provide AIS opportunities; monitor the progress of students in all content areas; provide professional development on teaching and learning strategies for long term ELLs. Former ELLs receive additional help during their Global studies classes, which is co-taught by Ms. Burlingam, the ESL instructor, Teachers who speak French, Creole, and Spanish. also provide additional support during AIS. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Students will utilize Chrome books to access STEAM/STEM literacy websites aligned with content area themes. The ENL instructors will customize the website resources and materials based on the ELL students' linguistic and content area needs. Classroom activities will be monitored and immediate feedback will be given to the students. The resource materials will include:Flocabularywww.flocabulary.comwww.ESLlibrary.comUpfront New York Times Magazines, online student and teacher resourceshttps://upfront.scholastic.comwww.newsela.comwww.tweentribune.comNew Readers Press Texts (Intermediate and Advanced levels)20 Chrome booksCollege and Careershttp://www.flocabulary.com/unit/paying-for-college/Paying for Collegehttps://www.flocabulary.com/unit/paying-for-college/Global History QuizletSheltered English Strategieshttps://quizlet.com/18616400/global-history-regents-review-flash-cards/Global History & Geography Regents Review by Sean Carrig and Gus Egan on iBooks. (Sheltered English Approach)https://shop.elitereaders.com/book/636822138/global-history-geography-regents-reviewStudent Loanshttps://www.flocabulary.com/unit/student-loansIn core content classes, teachers are required to implement differentiated instruction, inquiry model, and scaffolded instruction with the support of technology in the teaching and learning of ELLs. Students receive ESL support during their ESL classes as well as their Academic Intervention Services sessions. Each of those classes takes place five times a week.MATERIALS:Oxford Picture DictionariesMilestones TextbookAge-appropriate novels and short stories to foster literary readingHMH Collections materials for ELLs (embedded in the Collections ELA curriculum)In addition, students will be provided with rubrics, checklists and templates to guide them towards mastery of skills and content.For higher student engagement students will be given choices and teachers will encourage student input in creating instructional materials. 0  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? There is a prominent teacher practice of curricular adjustment at UAA. Each teacher is required to make curricular revisions tailored to the individual needs of all ELLs and SWDs.In addition, ELLs and SWDs interact and collaborate with other general education students in various settings such as content area classes, AIS, gym, lunch, field trips, and after-school activities such as tutoring, sports practice and championships, and the law club, which meets weekly both in school and outside, when they visit law firms, congressmen offices, etc. All curriculum is aligned to CCLS. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs receive additional support during AIS classes. Also, content area teachers meet with the ESL teacher weekly to ensure various strategies are used to target the ELL population. All groups are addressed depending on what their needs are. Services are offered in English as well as in their native language thanks to the support from former ELLs or students who speak the same language as the target group. Said students will receive community service credit hours for helping their peers. : 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For SY 18-19 we will offer an extension to our period 9 ESL class. The new addition will take place before the school day starts. Students will meet the ESL teacher for breakfast in the school cafe and then proceed to a 40 minute class before their school day begins. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have the same access to programs as non ELLs. We currently offer ELLs AIS, law club participation, and after-school sports programs. Students are notified by teachers, the parent coordinator, and social worker about such activities. Students who show interest are invited to participate in several activities if they are not already part of their regular schedule. Once students sign up, they fully participate in the activities that are offered. As for after school and supplemental services, students are encouraged to attend after school ESL, Regents prep, and students clubs such as the Art club and the Modeling club. There are sports hosted at the school and students who meet the academic and medical eligibility requirements can join. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The UAA ESL program uses a variety of textbooks, novels, bilingual and picture dictionaries, authentic materials such as newspaper articles, and the Internet. When studying for the NYSESLAT, students utilize the textbook prep as follows:MATERIALS:Continental's NEW YORK ELLsMilestones TextbookOxford Picture Dictionaries 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We do not offer native language except when advanced or former ELLs help beginners with their class work or homework during both class time or after-school AIS 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Milestones caters to students' needs individually since the level of difficulty progresses as students move along. As students do the online activities, their score results adjust the reading level to which they are exposed. Also, class assignments are differentiated. Beginners, intermediate, and advanced students are challenged to perform according to their skill and grade level as much as possible. 1  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our students share the gym, cafeteria, and library. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the beginning of the school year, new ELLs are invited to participate in our freshman introductory sessions such as freshman orientation offered in June and August. The parent coordinator, Tamara Bradford and the guidance counselor, Marsha Desroches introduce new students to classes and teachers during the enrollment and registration process. New ELLs attend AIS four times a week with their ESL teacher, a Spanish, and a Haitian-Creole speaking paraprofessional 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish is offered to all ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? There is an increasing cultural diversity in our student population and the movement toward globalization and these trends require that instructors develop 21st century in-depth understanding of the ways in which the different socio-linguistic cultural backgrounds of students impact upon their acquisition mastery of academic concepts.All Urban Action Academy HS teachers and administrators will receive training the 2nd Wednesday of each month from 2:30 pm-3:50 pm beginning in October 2018 to June 2019. ENL teachers and designated literacy coaches will provide professional development workshops. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. N/A 2  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ELL parents will participate in bilingual family workshops to explore college and careers through content project based learning assignments, college tours, family city sightseeing cultural excursions and live and virtual web based bilingual seminars and webinars. The rationale for the family literacy college and careers component of the program is that immigrant parents are often unfamiliar with the skills and procedures that their children need in preparation for college and careers in the 21st century. This component of the program would provide outreach activities that would enable immigrant families to become active participants in the education of their children. Activities would be scheduled bi-weekly on Thursdays and they would take place during afternoon (2:30 pm-3:30 pm) and available optional evening hours (5:00 pm-6:30 pm ). The workshop providers would include bilingual college representatives, bilingual counselors, and presenters. Parents would be notified via bilingual phone blasts, emails, and notifications translated in their home language. During the registration process, LEP parents of newly admitted ELL students will meet with a bilingual pedagogue who is fluent in their home language including but not limited to Haitian Creole, Arabic, French, Spanish or Arabic. The parent coordinator, Ms. Tamara Bradford, will also collaborate with the bilingual pedagogue to ensure that bilingual parents receive PTA orientation materials, inclusive of a video presentation in their home language which provides them with information concerning school wide activities and the various English language learning programs that are available for their child. Interpretation services from the Department of Education will be provided to parents and all correspondences, phone blasts, and fliers will be provided in the language indicated on the home language survey that was completed by the ELL students’ parents and/or guardians. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parents visit the school often for one on one teacher conferences regarding academic progress. The ENL teacher as well as the Guidance Counselor also meet with parents to offer strategies for how to support their children. Below are next year's plans for parental involvement as indicated in the Title III IPlan section.SCHEDULE AND DURATIONTopic: Title III Information Session for Parents and GuardiansRationale: Parents will have the opportunity to meet, greet, eat, obtain information in an informal settingProvider: Ms. Burlingame & Ms. BradfordDate: September /October 2018Hours: 1. 5 hoursAudience: Parents of ELL students Topic: Bilingual Parent SurveysRationale: ELL parents will participate in a virtual tour of the school’s website. They will also have the opportunity to complete the parent survey, communicate with their child’s teachers.Provider: Ms. Bradford & Ms. DesrochesDate: November 2018Hours: 1. 5 hoursAudience: Parents of ELL students Topic: Introducing College ProgramsRationale: Identifying & Analyzing students' Interests, needs, goalsProvider: COSA, Ms. CrippenDate: December 2018Hours: 1. 5 hoursAudience: Parents of ELL students Topic: Immigration and Your RightsRationale: Scholarship, Citizenship and Financial Aid ProgramsProvider: Representative from the Office of ImmigrationDate: January 2019Hours: 1. 5 hoursAudience: Parents of ELL students Topic: NYSESLAT Information Session for ParentsRationale: Celebrating Student Achievements: Awards Ceremony and RefreshmentsProvider: Ms. Burlingame, Ms. Bradford, Dr. Isom, Ms. DesrochesDate: February 2019Hours: 1. 5 hoursAudience: Parents of ELL students Topic: Meeting High School Graduation RequirementsRationale: To provide parents with Regents translation resources and instructional aides that will empower and assist their children in meeting high school graduation requirementsProvider: Big Word Translation RepresentativesDate: March/April 2019Hours: 1. 5 hoursAudience: Parents of ELL students Topic: Family Day Excursion to the Statue of LibertyRationale: Making Cross Cultural Connections From the Inner-CityProvider: CitySighting TourDate: May/June 2019Hours: TBAAudience: Parents of ELL students Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. At this time, we have provided information that explains our program for our ELL students. 3  4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Dr. F. Iris Garcia, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Urban Action Academy School DBN: 18K642 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dr. F. Iris Garcia Title Principal Ms. Ronda Razak Assistant Principal Ms. Tamarra Bradford Parent Coordinator Ms. Allison Burlingame ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Simone Dandridge Parent Mr. Sandy Faiella Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Novella Bobb Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Nina Coates Ms. Keiya Smith Coach Coach Ms. Marsha Desroches School Counselor Mr. Michael Prayor Sourette Fougere Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Sourette Fougere Dr. Deborah Isom Other Assistant Prncipal N/A N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 08/15/2018 08/15/2018 08/15/2018 08/15/2018 08/15/2018 08/15/2018 08/15/2018 08/15/2018 08/15/2018 08/15/2018 08/15/2018 08/15/2018 08/15/2018 08/15/2018 08/15/2018 6 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Urban Action Academy Superintendent: Michael Prayor DBN: 18k642 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Allison Marsha Burlingame Desroches ENL Teacher Guidance Counselor No No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We assess for language preference using the HLIS and parent language preference form, completed by parents upon registration. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 7  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali Croatian French Haitian Creole Nahuatl English Spanish 36 1 1 6 38 1 266 21 9.73 0.27 0.27 1.62 10.27 0.27 71.89 5.68 36 1 1 5 40 1 267 19 9.73 0.27 0.27 1.35 10.81 0.27 72.16 5.14 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English and Haitian Creole. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent Bill of Rights September and monthly PA meetings Student Code of Conduct September and monthly PA meetings School calendar September and monthly PA meetings Student Progress Reports Every six weeks Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The Department of Education Website provides translated documents in the languages that our families speak. They are readily available on the website. The Department of Education Website provides translated documents in the languages that our families speak. They are readily available on the website. The Department of Education Website provides translated documents in the languages that our families speak. They are readily available on the website. The reports are automatically translated into the preferred language of parents when they are downloaded. 8  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Curriculum Night September, November, March and May Parent teacher conferences September, November, March and May Parent workshops Monthly PTA meetings Monthly Wednesday's-Family outreach and communication Weekly provide interpretation service(s)? We have staff members who are fluent in Haitian Creole, Arabic and Spanish. We will ensure that those staff are present during these meetings to facilitate translation services. We will also use the over the phone interpretation services if necessary to support our families. We have staff members who are fluent in Haitian Creole, Arabic and Spanish. We will ensure that those staff are present during these meetings to facilitate translation services. We will also use the over the phone interpretation services if necessary to support our families. We have staff members who are fluent in Haitian Creole, Arabic and Spanish. We will ensure that those staff are present during these meetings to facilitate translation services. We will also use the over the phone interpretation services if necessary to support our families. We have staff members who are fluent in Haitian Creole, Arabic and Spanish. We will ensure that those staff are present during these meetings to facilitate translation services. We will also use the over the phone interpretation services if necessary to support our families. We have staff members who are fluent in Haitian Creole, Arabic and Spanish. We will ensure that those staff are present during these meetings to facilitate translation services. We will also use the over the phone interpretation services if necessary to support our families. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 9  Our Assistant Principal is fluent in Arabic, we have a School Aide and Teacher who are fluent in Spanish and we have a Guidance Counselor who is fluent in Haitian Creole. These staff members will be aware that they assist in providing language support services to families. We will also utilize over the phone interpretation services provided by the Department of Education. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Principal and Administrative staff have identified staff members who speak the languages of our families that can make outreach calls. We will also use the Translation and interpretation unit. In September, our staff will receive a copy of Chancellor's Regulations A-663 and information where they access the DoE translation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parent Bill of Rights is distributed to parents and they are able to receive copies in their preferred language. There are also the family welcome posters that is translated into various languages that is located in the main office of the school. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent survey, PTA meetings and weekly Parent Engagement designated days are reserved for parent outreach and engagement. All activities will be aligned with the Title III mandates. 0 
