 15K656 School Name: BROOKLYN HIGH SCHOOL OF THE ARTS Principal: DANIEL VECCHIANO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Brooklyn High School of the Arts 331500011656 9 to 12 345 Dean Street 718-855-2412 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 15K656 718-246-2389 Fax: Anthony Gonzalez Agonzalez59@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: Daniel A. Vecchiano Tim Evans Marion Samuels Daniel A. Vecchiano SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Kay Ramsingh Fiona Leung Christina Ramsey NONE Geographical District: 15 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Anita Skop Superintendent: 131 Livingston Street ASkop@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-935-4317 Phone Number: 718-935-4356 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn West Field Office FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street Bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-2382 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Daniel A. Vecchiano Tim Evans Marion Samuels Anthony Gonzalez Kay Ramsingh Fiona Leung Christina Ramsey NONE Maureen Browne Neal L.Singh *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Assistant Principal   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Michelle John ShavonneMilliner Kay Ramsingh Michelle Smith Robert Quinlan Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Assistant Principal Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Brooklyn Arts is a dual-mission high school dedicated to providing aspiring artists and scholars with an academically rigorous pre-college course of study and a comprehensive, four-year pre-conservatory arts program. At Brooklyn Arts, life-long learners use their creativity to enrich their education. By using the abundant resources of our great city, students are constantly being challenged to achieve their highest artistic and academic potential. Brooklyn Arts   fosters strong partnerships with parents, families, and the community to holistically develop global citizens who are prepared to meet the challenges of the 21st century. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our school’s vibrant Brooklyn location allows us to take advantage of the hip, urban, artistic vibe of this borough, and it provides us with opportunities to utilize the performance spaces and resources that surrounds us. Brooklyn Arts is at the center of one of the most vibrant art scenes in New York City, and we invite students from all five boroughs to experience the dynamic arts education and rigorous academic curriculum offered here at our school. Our school is a unique place where both the Arts and Academics take center stage, to ensure that the educational experience for each of our students is truly unique. The programs, classes, and overall opportunities provided will have a lasting effect and our students are afforded all resources necessary to be successful in all of their endeavors. This year, our school has been given the distinct designation of being Brooklyn's only fully screened Arts High School. Being Brooklyn's officially designated Arts school has brought up countless opportunities to expand our programs, our faculty, and the level of instruction for our students. Our Pre-Conservatory Arts Program has received the highest honors. Our Jazz Band and Vocal Select Choir have proven to be champions statewide receiving “Gold” honors, exhibiting the highest standards. The Musical Theatre’s production of "Into the Woods" wowed audiences from around the city with sold-out performances. Students in our art program were lauded for their exceptional artwork and received citywide honors and recognition including Melonie Knight's The Walk being on exhibition at the Met! Brooklyn Arts’ Dance Department is one of the finest preparatory programs for dancers in the city. Students are classically trained in ballet and receive the finest instruction in modern dance. This year’s Senior dance concert, titled Blackout, was met with resounding success after its sold-out run in May. Our widely-attended Brooklyn Arts' Lecture Series was a highlight of this year's efforts to engage our whole school community, and beyond. Our lecturers were academic scholars and artists from around the country. Academics at Brooklyn Arts provide the rigor for students seeking college admission. We offer an ever-increasing number of Regents and Advance Placement courses in all academic disciplines. We also offer partnerships with the City University of New York and Long Island University for advance students seeking opportunities to gain college credit while at Brooklyn Arts. With our AVID (Advancement Via Individual Determination) program, students who require additional support gain techniques to allow for mastery in academic areas. Our 90% passing rate in the English/Language Arts Regents allows students to take Advance Placement classes in their sophomore year. As an administration and staff, it is our ultimate goal to make this crucial time in our students’ lives memorable and rewarding. We aim to educate our students using a holistic approach. Expectations are high and self motivation and 0  determination are encouraged and nurtured. When our teachers, administrators, students, and parents work together, there is nothing we can’t accomplish as a community. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We are extremely committed to serving and providing the needs of all of our students. One notable example that we are extremely proud of is the work being done by our Special Education Department and the School Implementation Team (SIT). The team is comprised of our special education teachers, our guidance counselors, two assistant principals, two general education teachers, our ESL teacher, school psychologist and social worker. This tight-knit team meets monthly to ensure meticulous attention to our special needs students and to communicate with general education teachers to turnkey the mandated accommodations and modifications for students. We have built up our special education program by an augmenting Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classes, scrutinizing our Individualized Education Programs (IEP) to ensure alignment to rigorous Common Core Learning Standards to ensure high expectations for all, and making strategic hires to meld a team of devoted individuals who work tirelessly to implement requisite IEP components in the classroom. In conjunction with this our Transitioning has improved greatly as each student and parent complete a Transition survey/questionnaire that serves as key data to best support students’ academic and socio-emotional growth and subsequent transition to life after BHSA. What is incredible about our school is that regardless of disability status each student has the opportunity to engage in the passion that they love, their art strand, on a daily basis. For some upperclassmen that have fulfilled prerequisite courses and are on a college-ready track might even have the chance to engage in double period arts to best prepare their portfolios for conservatory. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In reference to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Brooklyn High School of the Arts continues to have student achievement as it’s prioritized focus with every program, resource, and decision that is made. Student achievement, whether that be through quantitative data in the form of augmenting ELA Regents 75% or above passing rate or qualitative data in the form of increased college and career readiness through increased AP offerings, serves as the central lens at BHSA, We are proud of the progress that has been made in the triad of rigorous instruction, collaborative teachers, and effective school leadership. Brooklyn High School of the Arts empowers teachers to assume the role of leaders in their classroom and the school community; this comes via the collaborative nature of the allotted professional development time not only on Fridays, but in the form of daily common planning, embedded into the teachers school day, by discipline. Collaborative curriculum-mapping that aligns standards, assessments, questions, and critical-thinking concepts is a skill that teachers pride themselves on as they incorporate rigorous instruction to incorporate Common Core Learning Standards. The English Department now offers sophomores in January the Common Core ELA Regents which this past year resulted in 89% pass rate with a high percentage attaining over a 75% as well; this paradigm shift in rigor, high expectations, and persistence to meet the needs of each student has been due to the aforementioned interweaving of rigorous instruction, collaborative teaching, and effective school leadership. 1  Additionally, we offered the exam to our 9th graders, to a success rate of 92% passing. The professional development team in the beginning of the school year conducted a needs-assessment for the staff with respect to which areas they would want to focus on in the realm of professional development. This was helpful for the team to be strategic at the onset of the school year and due to the trust that had been built the administration and the professional development team collaborated together to form targeted growth areas for staff to focus on in addition to celebrations of best practice. Additionally, our Advanced Placement Human Geography course has seen tremendous strides, with 35% of students receiving college credit. 2 students earned a rating of 5, and 12 students a rating of 4. A key area of focus for this upcoming school year will be to continue the positive momentum in the science department, by offering more rigorous Advanced Placement courses in Biology and Chemistry. Additionally, the strides made in the Humanities and Science Departments will be translated to Mathematics. Resources and professional development will continue to be targeted at these areas so that comprehensive gains can be made here as well. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 15K656 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 867 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 38 41 21 25 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 30 32 22 16 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 69.0% % Attendance Rate 61.9% % Reduced Lunch 0.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 21.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.17 2% 21% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 98% 90% 73.5% 8.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 58 57 17 90.0% 6.0% 15.9% 68.1% 3.0% 4.3% 10 16% 5 N/A N/A 94% 80% 98.4% 21% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. For a needs assessment of BHSA’s academic program in response to the element of Collaborative Teaching, as mentioned earlier the Professional Development Team goals, a needs assessment amongst the pedagogical staff is conducted in September to attain the strengths and growth areas in order to strategically differentiate the adult learning. By doing this it empowers the teacher leaders running the professional development to support their colleagues which in turn help improve student achievement by the sharing of best practices and inter-visitations. The needs assessment identifies the priority needs of the staff pertaining to professional development. With respect to BHSA’s strengths and needs relative to this element, the school’s instructional focus has remained consistent through 2016-2017 into 2017-2018 and will be the same for 2018-2019, this being “Reading and Writing Across the Curriculum.” Last year’s central pedagogical and professional development text was Teach Like a Champion by Doug Lemov while the text the previous three years before that was Collaborative Analysis of Student Learning (CASL) by Georgea M. Langer, Amy B. Colton, and Loretta S. Goff. These texts were utilized to prepare staff for the transition into a new teacher evaluation system as well as the requisite instructional shifts for the Common Core. As mentioned previously the primary text for this school year is Essential Questions by McTighe and Wiggins. For the Cabinet they have read Organizing Schools for Improvement by Bryk, Bender-Sebring, Allensworth , Luppescu, and Easton (2010) and consistently share research articles from scholarly search engines such as ERIC, ProQuest and Academic Elite. Observation data from Advance from 2014-15 speaks to this in addition to the aforementioned professional development needs assessment data. Administration is keen on sharing pragmatic Initial Planning Conference (IPC) Resources, such as Initial Planning Conferences, Post-conference, utilization of mentors, Danielson component-specific professional development, optional Danielson self-assessment forms during the IPC’s and other resources have been exhausted to avail teachers of multiple avenues to enhance their adaptation to the Advance framework. An instructional practice that has been utilized more often this year is the Socratic Seminar in addition to multiple graphic organizer acronyms (BAGPIPES and SPRITE for History, ICE for Humanities, etc.) to support students’ reading and writing. This was generated due to disaggregated assessment data from 2015-16. The entire History Department collaboratively implements a research paper at the same time to engage students in proper formatting, writing, citing, etc. In the development of a paper that could be submitted to a college professor. Last year was the first year we did it and had great successes while learning a lot form what we would tweak going into this school year. We believe this to be a very important assessment students experience in order to become college and career ready. With respect specifically to the Danielson Framework for Teaching, observations are done with an eye to questioning, rigor, and engagement. Lesson plans should have Essential Questions and the design of 4  the classroom lesson should promote student-centered activities. Executive functioning skills promoted throughout classrooms as well as augment academic habits of mind. This is an area where BHSA could improve to permeate these practices more pervasively. This was generated due to disaggregated data from 2016-2017. Teacher support one another through this process, utilize proper APA/Chicago Style citations, and and professional learning will be collaborative amongst the teachers as they utilize professional development time on Wednesdays to analyze student work. Integrated co-Teachers (ICT) have led the charge with respect to differentiation strategies in the classroom and permeating this through grade and content teams with the rest of the staff. Through the use of SESIS and collaboration between teachers in their respective teacher teams, accommodations and modifications via special education teachers have helped support the general education pedagogues. This stems from professional development needs assessment data generated from the staff. Teachers have engaged in inter-visitations, through their own inclination and via feedback on observation reports in order to cultivate a professional learning community around collaborative support. This also promotes sharing best practices. This was generated from observation data compiled by the administration via Advance in addition to our goal of aligning professional development. Instructional practices to promote high levels of students thinking and participation have been more turn-and-talks to enhance student voice, cold-calling to garner authentic snapshots of students’ learning, more Socratic Seminars this year to engage students through questioning and text-based evidence. Specific data sources/trends that can be cited relative to the Framework for Great Schools are baseline assessment results in the beginning of the school year, ongoing periodic assessments, mid-year baseline assessment results to compare the growth from the Fall, continuing ongoing periodic assessments, rigorous writing assessments such as research papers and timed writings, and inevitably the AP and Regents examinations. The priority need in relation to rigorous instruction is continuing to augment reading and writing across the curriculum and increasing college and career benchmarks such as 75% or better on the ELA Regents and 80% or above on the Math Regents. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of the 2018-2019 school year 100% of teachers, in their respective departments, will have implemented an arts-infused, research-based writing based Common Core-aligned unit of instruction that will engage students in their classes through a college and career ready assessment. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Common Core Learning Standards-aligned research writing task with in content areas. Multiple research writing drafts what will enable students to peer-review one another’s papers as well as self-assess all in alignment with collaboratively-created writing rubric by department. All students. September 2018 through June 2019 Disaggregated strengths and weaknesses communicated to parents of all students in order to support students’ needs at home and in school. Student sub-groups such as special education and ESL will be additionally supported by their respective SETSS teacher, ESL teacher, or any relevant service provider, to ensure maximization of student success throughout this task. All students. September 2018 through June 2019 Professional Development Team, Teacher Leaders, Content bases pedagogical staff within their respective department, assistant principals. Teachers and assistant principals communicating to parents. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In September 2018 we will continue the reorganization of our Parent Association to be more reflective of our studio arts offerings. This will help focus parent efforts, specific to their child's needs and talents. Also, we will be offering Parent Workshops beginning in October, so that they can experience the challenging curriculum that we offer their children daily. These workshops will be led by both studio and academic teachers, working in collaboration with administration and guidance teams. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use our common planning time during the school day as well as our after school common planning time after school and our School Based Option to make the best use of the teachers’ time to maximize their ability to work together. We will also use our Circular 6 assignments to enable staff to opt into Professional Opportunities that they have interest in as well as the value add to our school community. 6  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will discuss during weekly common planning time to gauge progress and discuss process. By mid-year teachers working together will be able to determine if the students are on target. At the mid-term mark teachers will be able to make changes in the process if that proves necessary. The quantifiable mid-point benchmark will be the disaggregated results of the January 2019 Regents. This will be midway to June 2019. Administratively, the Principal and Assistant Principals will do Mid-Year check-ins with the entire staff, to gauge progress in curriculum, and student achievement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We will discuss with teachers as well as survey the teachers to help determine the effectiveness of this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? School leaders will continue to consistently communicate high expectations to staff and provide training to meet those expectations. Teacher teams and staff establish a culture for learning that systematically communicate a unified set of high expectations for all students and provide clear, focused feedback and personalized guidance supports. The Principal's Performance Review last year indicated Well Developed for many indicators and categories so with respect to supportive environment the environment is extremely supportive as teachers utilize student performance trends in their classrooms and across classrooms via grade team/ content team meeting discussions to pinpoint students’ needs and to be proactive in support. We have an extremely high attendance rate, well over 90%, so students come to school each day excited to participate in their arts strands on a daily basis. The school’s effective communications of high expectations to staff result in a culture of mutual accountability for those expectations. Guidance and advisement will support and continue to ensure that all students including high-needs subgroups own their educational experience and are prepared for the next year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-2019 school year we will bring in a new mental health facilitator. We will also increase guidance lessons for all of our students by 50%. We will also hold monthly town hall meetings by cohort to send the students a clear message concerning the criteria for graduation and student process toward graduation. During the 2017-2018 school year we will continue our Advanced Placement program and increase our college tutoring program by 10%. Tutors come from a variety of colleges such as Hunter, Pratt and Long Island University to assist students with the demands of the rigorous curriculum. The program keeps in mind the individual perspective of students and staff, which allowing each to identify with the goals and motivations behind the actions of the other. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Additional guidance support for all students enabling each grade to continue to have their own guidance counselor, as well as a mental health facilitator. Enabling the caseloads to decrease and the service to students to increase. With a decrease in caseloads this empowers guidance counselors to have more flexibility in contacting and meeting with parents. Continue to maintain the Advanced Placement program and increasing the tutoring component by 10%. We believe here at Brooklyn Arts that College and Career readiness begins with a rigorous curriculum, and AP courses provide the platform for that. Parents and students agree to participate in the program and sign a contract upon entry into AP courses. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Students 2018 through 2019 Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors 2018 through 2019 Assistant Principals, AVID teachers, college tutors. All Students in Advanced Placement which is appox. 280 students. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will use PTA workshops as led by staff and administration Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will continue to work closely with Hunter College to make certain we have enough tutors for our students. AP Humanities will continue to train the tutors in AVID methodology. Guidance Counselors will keep logs on student contacts as well as parent contacts to make certain there is an increase in service delivery to our students and their families. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 9  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will conduct a mid-year check in using the logs from Guidance Counselor as well as observations of Guidance counselors to make certain there is an increase in student and family contacts and an increase in service delivery. We will conduct surveys on mid-year progress from the perspective of the student, family, teachers and College tutors. We will also look at teacher scholarship reports and observation feedback on the ADVANCE system. In addition, we will use an "IMPACT" protocol in order to intervene with struggling student populations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will review the logs, observe the Guidance Counselors and survey the community to help determine effectiveness of this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school’s effective communication of high expectations to staff results in a culture of mutual accountability of those expectations. Guidance and advisement supports ensure that all students, including high-needs subgroups, own their educational experience and are prepared for the next level. This is reported in the Quality Review. Teacher teams shared that they lead professional development sessions where teachers provoke their peers with feedback, and teachers visit colleagues’ classrooms to see the implementation of the professional development. Teachers reported that they trust each other and feel comfortable visiting their peers’ classrooms because they learn from each other. They have a system in place called, Post It Pop In where leaders and teachers observe a teacher during a lesson and write feedback on the post it. As one teacher said, “We meet daily during our common planning tie and we are always giving each other feedback and support”. This is reported in the Quality Review. The school has a detailed professional development plan that was collaboratively created and is aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teaching as well as the school’s instructional focus, which is reading and writing across the curricula. Professional learning is facilitated by administrators as well as teachers. Teachers referenced that this change in professional learning has allowed teachers to take a much greater ownership role in sharing of best practices across all departments. The principal also shared how strengthening the collaboration has helped teachers implement the school’s instructional focus, which is evident in feedback given on teacher observations. This culture of mutual accountability for high expectations has allowed staff to better support each other during professional learning and individual free time. In the vast majority of classrooms, including English language learners and students with disabilities, are motivated and actively engaged in classroom activities and discussions, resulting in the production of meaningful work products that prepare students for college and career readiness. Needs assessment data was gathered through analysis of the PPO, the Quality Review, and PD feedback forms. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 1  By June 2019 we will have an increase of 10% in credit accumulation in regents’ as well non regents’ classes. Teachers will work closely with the students and their families to keep the lines of communication open and enable families to be informed on progress and lack of progress toward passing a given class. During the 2018-2019 school year 100% of the teachers and staff will engage in a minimum of 80 minutes of professional development each week led by teachers to enhance their instructional practice, as well as daily embedded common planning 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will work closely with students providing differentiation of instruction to enable student to have a deeper understanding of curriculum and pass more classes helping students to reach our goal of college and career readiness. Teachers and staff will engage in varied professional development opportunities for at least 80 minutes per week. The professional development will be personalized based on teacher and staff survey. The professional development will be teacher-led, except in cases where teachers express the need for outside expertise. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Students September 2018 through June 2019. All Students, Teachers, Assistant Principals, Parents. All Teachers and staff. September 2018 through June 2019. All teachers, Staff, and the Principal and Assistant Principals. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will utilize PTA workshops with the staff Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We have hired additional teachers to decrease class size so that students receive additional attention. Teachers completed a survey to determine their additional text book as well as supportive materials they need to provide the students in their class additional materials. The teacher professional development team has conducted a survey of teachers to understand what teachers expected in relation to professional development. 3  Our SBO will enable the teachers to have 80 of professional development time on Tuesdays without having anyone in the building to potentially distract from the process. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will use the report cards and scholarship reports to determine the progress midyear on credit accumulation for the students. We will conduct an additional survey/needs assessment for teachers and staff to determine if their professional development needs are being met. We are also now making great use of the DOE's "Progress to Graduation Tracker", which is a great tool to inform students and families. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will survey our staff and assess what they think that they need in relation to professional development. Giving the staff a louder voice may help us understand what they staff believes they need and hopefully what the staff feels. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School leaders consistently communicate high expectations to staff and provide training to meet those expectations. Teacher team and staff establish a culture for learning that systematically communicates a unified set of high expectations for all students and provide clear, focused feedback and personalized guidance supports. School leaders and faculty ensure curricula are aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and strategically integrate the instructional shifts. Higher order skills are emphasized in curricula and tasks in a coherent way across grades and content areas and for all learners. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 100% of teachers/staff who are working and at least 75% of our parents and students will be using skedula. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will be investing in skedula to increase the exchange of important information. Enable the teachers to get more accomplished in a shorter amount of time, and enable the parents to have more information at there fingertips. The entire school community will have ongoing PD on the finerpoints of the new system, as well as time during the school day and in certain instances during the evening hours to practice on the new system. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Entire school community. September 2016 through June 2017 Principal, Assistant Principals, Mentors, and Teachers, Parents and our students. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will interact and learn during PTA workshops led by the staff. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use creative scheduling, in-house mentor, outside mentors. Teachers will welcome colleagues into their classrooms for inter-visitation. Additional non school based professional development where necessary. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 6  Mid-year conversations with teachers and mentors as well as TIP meetings and discussions in relation to the ADVANCE ratings mid-year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will survey the members of the community, our parents, students, teachers and staff will complete survey to determine effectiveness. We will also look to our data on exams as well as class passing data. We need to see if our messages were heard, understood and could there be action. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our College and career readiness percentage is low based on our recent reports. We have conducted a study, and our parents have expressed a need to receive additional training and information on College and Career Readiness. The Principal and various staff members attend monthly PTA and SLT meetings and all parents have expressed interest in deepening their knowledge around the College process. This is reported in the School Quality Snapshot and the School Quality Guide. Our Parent Coordinator will work closely with the Principal, and the PTA to attend PTA meetings and keep the parents informed concerning activities in the school as well as information concerning College and Career Readiness that may take place before, during or after school. Our Guidance Counselor will send emails out every Monday to parents, the emails will contain information concerning; College fairs, financial aid events, scholarship opportunities, information on school related issues, meetings, and report card distribution so as to keep the parents informed on events at our school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 we will have a 25% increase in attendance at PTA meetings as well as informative seminars that we sponsor for the parents on various topics with emphasis on information concerning College and career readiness. The 25% increase will be measured against previous attendance of the PTA meetings. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will conduct brief interview and survey all parents when they walk into our building to attempt to understand how we can incorporate additional parent and families into the day to day workings of the school. As well as to develop a greater understanding pertaining to what the parent really need from the school. Guidance Counselors will work more closely with our families sharing critical information as well as update the student’s progress for the families. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Parent September 2018 through June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Secretaries, and Parent Coordinator. Parents, Guidance Counselors and Students September 2018 through June 2019 Principal, assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors and Parent Coordinators. If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Metropolitan Opera House provides free tickets to families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Hiring an additional Guidance Counselor will enable the staff to have a division of labor that will permit greater parent contact. Title 1 parent involvement funding can be used in consultation with the PTA to fund additional parent seminars providing parents with opportunities to learn and become more knowledgeable in the area of College and Career Readiness. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 9  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the mid-year point we will review the guidance counselor’s logs to determine if there has been an increase in parent contact. We will also determine if all of the guidance lessons that we had scheduled were completed and conduct a survey of the student to see if the increase in guidance counselor contact has made a different in their perceived college and career readiness. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will review effectiveness at our town hall meeting with students and staff. We will need to know if the guidance counselor's messages are clear, and if necessary what changes would be necessary moving forward. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who are in the lowest third of the class. Low standardized test grades, teacher and or parent recommendations. Students who are in the lowest third of the class. Low standardized test grades, teacher and or parent recommendations. Students who are in the lowest third of the class. Low standardized test grades, teacher and or parent recommendations. Students who are in the lowest third of the class. Low standardized test grades, teacher and or parent recommendations. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Second English support class. All 9 th and 10 th graders will receive an extra period of Math instruction. 11, and 12 grade will receive an extra period where necessary. After school tutoring, as well as tutoring during select lunch periods and extra time to complete labs. After school tutoring as well as tutoring during select lunch periods. Small group between 15 and 18 students. Small group tutoring with English teacher or College tutor. During the school day as well as select lunch periods. After school and Saturday sessions. Small group under 25 students. During the school day, as well as select lunch periods. After school and Saturday sessions. Small group under 25 students. During the school day after school and select Saturdays. Small group under 25 students. During the school day, as well as after school. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students who may be exhibiting at risk behaviors, which can include but are not limited to, chronic Our four Guidance Counselor, One full time social worker, one part time social worker, will offer any One to one counseling, or small group counseling which ever is most appropriate at the Before school, during school and after school. As soon as we become aware of 1  lateness or absences from school and or class. Students who may be cutting, using drugs or alcohol. Students who may be homeless. at risk student, at risk services. time for the student or students. the need for these services. 2  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 14 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will continue to supply all school supplies for out STH population, which includes and are not limited to notebooks, backpacks, pens, pencils, paper, and snacks. We will provide extra tutoring after school and on select Saturdays. We will pay many of the fees, including be not limited to AP exams, and in many cases senior dues for senior graduation related activities. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We are a title 1 school. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 3  We intend to purchase school supplies as well as pay for student fees and special exams. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. . 4  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 1. Rigorous Multi-Tiered Process (Recruitment): Our hiring process includes various steps in order to attract and maintain HQT’s. We begin with attending diverse job fairs, posting on Idealist, and emailing our job posting to various list serves. From there we invite potential candidates to an Open House where they are able to interact with DOE staff, GSS staff and students. The participants are able to engage in conversation about the youth development principles and pedagogy. 2. From the open house we invite select candidates to interview. The interview includes: a classroom observation, a mock lesson with post-observation, a group interview with the committee, and a writing sample. 3. From this process we have been able to hire exceptional candidates that believe in our mission. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). New teachers will all receive a mentor teacher to work with during their first two years. Weekly PD with our coach who is also a Senior Common Core fellow. Weekly PD with Assistant Principal to enhance Common Core Tasks and alignment. Teachers, AP’s paraprofessionals and the Principal will have the opportunity to take advantage of all PD offered by the Central Department of Education. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. . 5  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). . Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Does not apply. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. During our 80 minutes of PD time once a week and our Common Planning time as well as our Circular 6 options teachers will be able to discuss options with colleagues as well as the administration team. Teacher teams will be able to have deep conversations concerning these options and make the selection that is best for the teachers and the students that they serve. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Federal $487, 236 X 6 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) p18, p.24,p.26, p.32  Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 5,734,749 X p.16,p.18,p.21, p.24,p.26,p.32 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 7  effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 8  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Brooklyn High School of the Arts, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Brooklyn High School of the Arts will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 9  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 0  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Brooklyn High School of the Arts, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 1  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA)) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 2  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 3  ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 15 School Name Brooklyn High School of the Arts Borough Brooklyn School Number 656 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Mr. Daniel Vecchiano Assistant Principal Dr. Robert J. Quinlan Coach Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Michelle Hubbard Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Jiazi Lin / Mandarin Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Bianca Paz / Special Educa Related-Service Provider Superintendent Anita Skop School Counselor Ms. Miriam Medina Parent Ms. Marion Sameuls Parent Coordinator Mr. Anthony Gonzalez Field Support Center Staff Member David Olesh Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics 5  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 910 Total number of ELLs 9 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.99% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Lang. 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 12 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Right from the onset of the school year we administer school wide Baseline Assessments for all grade levels and content areas. This is critical in diagnosing early on which skills need to be targeted for personalized instruction in the classrooms. We utilize portions of the Regents examinations for each respective subject area to serve as Baselines as these are the 0 6  0 0 0 Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 skills and exams that students will need to pass in order to graduate high school. ELLs of course are included in this process and they are given the same exact Baseline Assessment as all other students. ELLs are assessed in content area classes through routine, daily formative assessments throughout the school year. 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Teachers are programmed in such a way that common planning time is offered to most similar-content area colleagues in order to collaborate to plan, implement, analyze, and discuss student work products. Administrators set the designated dates for the Baseline implementation school wide and teachers administer the diagnostics in their classrooms. This has been a routine at Brooklyn Arts for a number of years now so it is well embedded into the expectations of the start of the school year. Teachers collaborate together to score the assessments and determine how students performed as teachers utilize the NYSED rubrics to assess students' responses. Disaggregated data is distributed department-wide and school-wide. Individual teachers' classroom results are amalgamated into one sheet as well to identify patterns and trends. This data is subsequently shared with our ELL teacher so that they can provide timely and targeted supports to our ELL students in the stand alone ENL classes. The baseline data is critical to providing early intervention strategies to ensure the success of our ELL students. In January students take Regents which serve as Mid Year Baseline data which is also invaluable in supporting students' growth towards earning a 75% or 85% or better on their respective Regents exams. ELLs are highly supported in their stand alone ENL classes and vice-versa as the ELL teacher shares strategies with the general education content teachers to support ELLs in their classrooms as well. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Right from the onset of the school year we administer school wide Baseline Assessments for all grade levels and content areas. This is critical in diagnosing early on which skills need to be targeted for personalized instruction in the classrooms. We utilize portions of the Regents examinations for each respective subject area to serve as Baselines as these are the skills and exams that students will need to pass in order to graduate high school. ELLs of course are included in this process and they are given the same exact Baseline Assessment as all other students. 7  Administrators set the designated dates for the Baseline implementation school wide and teachers administer the diagnostics in their classrooms. This has been a routine at Brooklyn Arts for a number of years now so it is well embedded into the expectations of the start of the school year. Teachers collaborate together to score the assessments and determine how students performed as teachers utilize the NYSED rubrics to assess students' responses. Disaggregated data is distributed department-wide and school-wide. Individual teachers' classroom results are amalgamated into one sheet as well to identify patterns and trends. This data is subsequently shared with our ELL teacher so that they can provide timely and targeted supports to our ELL students in the stand alone ENL classes. The baseline data is critical to providing early intervention strategies to ensure the success of our ELL students. In January students take Regents which serve as Mid Year Baseline data which is also invaluable in supporting students' growth towards earning a 75% or 85% or better on their respective Regents exams. ELLs are highly supported in their stand alone ENL classes and vice-versa as the ELL teacher shares strategies with the general education content teachers to support ELLs in their classrooms as well. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? This school year the programming has been strategic in the sense that all teachers have common planning periods throughout the school day in conjunction with similar-content area colleagues. This will expedite inquiry focusing on analyzing students' work products as a means of developing strategies to support students in all of their classes and sharing best practices between pedagogues. Professional development time this school year will be heavy in the inquiry department as we will be utilizing the methodology entitled, "Collaborative Analysis of Student Learning (CASL)" which digs deep into sharing best practices and scrutinizing students' work through set inquiry cycles. ELL data, particularly since our population is so small, is easily incorporated into these frequent professional conversations in order to address intervention measures early and often throughout the school year. Students are flagged very early on in the sense that all of their teachers are alerted that these students need extra support in order to ensure their success. It is worth mentioning as well that our Testing Coordinator Assistant Principal Weit does a tremendous job utilizing RLAT to create a testing schedule and testing accommodations to ensure adherence to CR-154 for ELLs and former ELLs (where applicable). 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? N/A 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] All the aforementioned outcome assessments are analyzed and used to drive determinations in how to inform best practices around supporting our ELL program. First off, during the summer session we are furiously programming and our ELL students current NYSESLAT data informs early on which/what/how many stand-alone ELL courses we will need to offer in compliance with students' curren scores and ELL levels (emerging, transition, etc.). This of course is generated through our current RLAT ATS report. When programming and analyzing student data in 9th grade (ELLs, Special Education, and General Education), 8th grade ELA and Math scores are utilized to be as strategic as possible in ensuring the most appropriate placements for students. Ongoing transcript and Regents data informs ELL programming as we also offer the Common Core ELA Regents in 10th grade as a means of giving students as many opportunities as possible to earn over a 75% to test out of remedial college English. When students take this exam in January of sophomore year the teachers and teacher teams are able to disaggregate and analyze ELL data to best support students in earning a 75% or better in June so that all students are college and career ready. 8  6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The structures in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to our programs include two major areas, Common Planning Time and Professional Development Time. Common Planning Time was built strategically into the day via programming while the Professional Development Time on Fridays (shortened school days) allows for inquiry focused on the sharing and analysis of student work. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Instruction for ELLs is delivered via a freestanding ENL program. They are standalone courses taught by a trained and licensed ENL teacher, Ms. Michelle Hubbard. Students are programmed as per the regulations and recommended placements/periods as set forth in the 2017-2018 ELL Guide (aligned to CR-154). The students are grouped together in a standalone ELL period with mixed proficiency levels. The class meets everyday for a total of 206 minutes per week. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. N/A b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. Once the data is procured via RLAT from ATS the programming is subsequently accomplished to ensure students are in the appropriate ENL course. All students receive at least the minimum mandated number of instructional minutes according to their proficiency levels based off of their achievement data from the previous year's NYSESLAT. The class meets everyday for a total of 206 minutes per week. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL classes are organized with special emphasis on three content concentrations: ELA, Social Studies/History, and College Readiness (organization, test preparation, college personal statements, resumes). Students receive ENL specific instruction using ELA Common Core Standards and AIR (American Institute for Research) Units for ELL students. English is the primary use of instruction with use of students’ home language to support as necessary (specifically for newcomers). Instructional approaches and methods include modeling content where the teacher shows students mentor texts for writing. Another method is the gradual release model where students work together with the teacher, in groups, then independently. A third 9  strategy is homogeneous grouping by home language where students can support each other in their home language and in their English language development. A fourth approach is heterogeneous grouping, where students are grouped with different proficiency level partners to help scaffold their English language development. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Throughout the school year we do leverage, whenever necessary, staff members who speak the respective languages of our ELLs and former ELLs. Specifically, Ms. Jiazi Lin speaks Chinese Mandarin, Ms. Pierre and Ms. Valcourt both speak French-Haitian Creole, while Ms. Medina and Mr. Gonzalez speak Spanish. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? SIFE- No SIFE students in this school’s population. Newcomer- Newcomer students are typically in beginning fluency where speech may be fairly fluent but there may be gaps in academic reading and writing in English. Students will receive supports in both their home language and English. Supports include visual graphic organizers, visual bilingual dictionaries in students’ home language and English, sentence frames in English, visual word walls with content specific vocabulary posted in home language and English. Newcomers are paired heterogeneously with a higher proficiency peer who also speaks their home language. Newcomers receive one-to-one support when possible. Developing- Students who are developing receive scaffolded instruction that is level appropriate. Developing students receive cloze sentences, create personal visual dictionaries, use visual graphic organizers and bilingual dictionaries. Long Term- Long Term ELL students are often paired heterogeneously with lower English proficiency peers to support their language development, particularly in speaking and reading. Long Term ELLs are given higher order thinking tasks and are pushed to use critical thinking skills to analyze poetry and literature using specific annotation strategies as per ELA Common Core Standards. Students are also tasked with writing college personal statements, resumes, and preparing for college interviews to enhance speaking and writing development. Former ELLs- Former ELLs receive ENL support that helps them adapt to mainstream classes. Students receive supports as the ESL teacher works closely with their content area teachers to provide strategies and materials for accommodations such as graphic organizers and guided notes. Former ELLs practice timed writing and reading comprehension activities to practice test taking skills for mainstream content courses and other standardized testing. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status All students, regardless of proficiency level are supported in grade level content across subject areas meeting teacher objectives, content objectives and Common Core standards in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies. Instructional strategies to ensure ELL students access both academic content area include technology such as Merriam Webster online dictionary, language translation dictionaries like Collins Dictionary, Kahoot, an interactive site for student and teacher quizzes, PowerPoint presentations with visuals, visual word walls, videos, podcasts and dual language vocabulary lists in students’ home language and English depending on proficiency level. Students develop speaking, reading,writing, and listening skills in all activities which can include formal presentations, informal discussions, Socratic Seminars, Think-Pair-Share activities, Quick Write activities, Reading Comprehension practice and timed writing activities. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Programming and scheduling is flexible enough to accommodate our students who are both ELLs and have an IEP. With such a small population we are able to not only provide classroom settings in the least restrictive environment but also each student receives the art/studio in which they auditioned for on a daily basis. Students are able to utilize their creative talents in their 0  studio class while the aforementioned collaboration between teachers in common planning time and professional development time allows for sharing of student performance and needs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELLs are encouraged to participate in tutorials and academic intervention programs such as Saturday Enrichment which will begin shortly in early October. Saturday Enrichment was a powerful opportunity we began last spring and will be scaling it up strategically to incorporate even more students this Fall. Wherever needed the appropriate translation services will be provided (Spanish, Mandarin, or Haitian-Creole). 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? N/A 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? ELLs are absolutely provided equal access to all school programs. Every single student in the school have at least one studio class per day, some two to three a day as well where it fits into their schedule, and this is what makes Brooklyn Arts a unique school where every day student has personalized support from a professional artist in their studio classes. There are instances as well where ELLs, former ELLs, and current special education students are in Advanced Placement courses as we have open enrollment for the more rigorous classes in our school. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are supported with computers and Ipads using dictionary websites, academic websites for videos such as National Geographic for science and social studies. Students are all supported by language applications like Kahoot where teachers use visuals and text to quiz students on any content area. Newcomers are provided with bilingual dictionaries and a computer or tablet for use in ENL classes and content area classes where appropriate. Students of developing proficiency to long term and former ELLs use PowerPoint or Google Slides to create their own class presentations using text and visuals. Developing to Former ELLs use VoiceThread, a website to create oral recordings, to enhance oral language development. Students as mentioned, are supported by visual graphic organizer, sentence frames, cloze sentences, personal dictionaries, bilingual dictionaries, bilingual vocabulary lists, content specific visual word walls, and online videos from TedTalks, NewsELA, and National Geographic. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Home language support is assessed during the year through our ESL teacher and supported by pedagogues in the building who speak the respective languages of our students. Specifically, Ms. Pierre (French Teacher) and Ms. Valcourt (Math Teacher) support Haitian-Creole-speaking families and students whenever necessary, Ms. Medina (Guidance Counselor) and Mr. Gonzalez (Parent Coordinator) support Spanish-speaking families and students whenever necessary, and Ms. Lin (Mandarin Teacher) supports Mandarin/Cantonese-speaking families. This model is not only supported within the standalone ESL class but within all content areas as well. This is done through teacher collaboration and discussion of specific student needs via common planning time and professional development time. The goal is that students are able to transfer their respective language skills to English which in turn allows them to be successful on mandatory Regents examinations and coursework towards graduation as well as college and career readiness. 1  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Required services and support correspond to our ELLs ages and grade levels based off of graduation requirements, Regents exams aligned to their respective courses, and personalized, targeted tutoring. Parents receive information on graduation requirements, inclusive of credit and examination requirements, and have access to PupilPath for timely correspondence and information. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. N/A 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Students audition to become a part of the Brooklyn Arts community and specialize in their respective studio. During the audition process we do have our parent coordinator and bilingual-speaking counselor and teachers at the ready to support families who may need translation services to ensure all necessary and important information to get into Brooklyn Arts is communicated. Students receive our handbook, information about the academic program, graduation requirements, bell schedule, school website link, PupilPath information, school Gmail accounts, and access to a Brooklyn Arts Student Help Desk Gmail they can reach out to for support. Parents of accepted students are invited in on Chancellor's Conference Day in June of their 8th grade year to begin the process of support. We have an open line of communication throughout the summer, along with a summer reading assignment to keep the learning going for all students and to collect student data the minute they walk in the door, as well as an August Freshmen Orientation for further support and information to ensure families and students start off on the right foot. Our ENL teacher, guidance, and assistant principal/principal interviews all families denoted as requiring a Home Language Interview to properly support them. When necessary the NYSITELL is administered and there is timely programming to prevent any gaps of instructional time. This same process is adhered to during the school year when the situation arises that a newly enrolled student comes into Brooklyn Arts. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Students may enroll in any Advanced Placement course as we have open enrollment for these classes (AP English Language & Composition, AP English Literature & Composition, AP United States History, AP World History, AP Human Geography, AP Environmental Science, AP Statistics, AP Biology, and AP Psychology). Students have the opportunity to study a second language as we offer Chinese, French, Japanese, and Spanish. ELLs have the same opportunity as any other student to enroll not only in language electives but also double or triple arts periods. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? The professional development for ELL personnel began this year when our new ENL teacher Ms. Hubbard attended summer professional development for New ENL Teachers. Here she learned techniques, instructional methods, and some compliance issues involved with supporting ENL students and an ENL program. She is licensed in TESOL and French from NYU. 2  In-house and off-site professional development workshops are provided to the whole faculty during the school year, specifically on city-wide scheduled Professional Development days as well as our after-school mandatory professional development days which we have on Fridays. Shared best practices of differentiated techniques, utilization of technology, focusing on vocabulary development and literacy strategies, the "Special Considerations for ELL Teachers" document" is reviewed, and a laser-like focus on requisite skills for the argumentative and text analysis essays on the Common Core ELA Regents examination (supplemented with Baseline Assessment results). Teachers are required to participate in daily common planning time where there is a focus on instructional strategies, student work products, and literacy so that all students are supported with shared best practices. Interdisciplinary opportunities are provided on Friday professional development so that instructional strategies and supports/concerns for ELL students can be collaborated via multiple content areas. Our Pupil Personnel Committee this year, as always, will also focus on the socio-emotional and academic needs of our ELLs so that they are ensured all avenues of support are covered for our ELL students. This team incorporates the aforementioned staff members who are also bilingual. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Teachers have daily common planning time and after-school mandatory professional development on Fridays where student data and work is scrutinized through an inquiry method. ELL students are a part of teacher inquiry as a means of providing personalized supports and collaborating on best practices to support our ELL students. Agendas are saved for record-keeping, attendance is taken and teachers sign to document their presence and participation, and this year as she gets more practice and experience our ENL teacher will help lead professional development for the staff as part of the CR Part 154 regulations. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Parent outreach is made by all teachers, many on a daily basis, through phone calls, emails, and "anecdotals" in our PupilPath system. PupilPath is great in the sense that it has the ability to translate communications to parents into their native language so that there is no lost in translation moments in communicating to families. These translated documents have been vetted by our teachers to ensure its accuracy. This was extremely helpful because our Mandarin teacher went as far as reaching out to the people at Pupil Path to let them know there were a few terms that were erroneously translated in Mandarin. Parents are invited to come into school at any time to set up personalized appointments with translation services when needed so that they received the requisite information in the language of their choice. 3  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? This year we are making a greater concerted effort to provide PupilPath training to parents. Last year was our first year of implementation of Pupil Path so this year we will provide more targeted professional development for parents. For ELL parents we will have the necessary staff members available to assist with translation services in order for the parent to be able to access their child's grades, attendance, and anecdotals. When we consider parental support, ELLs included, we utilize the school survey data which is also translated at the time of its implementation so this is important data for us to leverage when fostering parental involvement. Our parent coordinator is a Spanish speaker and is able to nurture our ELL parental concerns. This year we are dividing up our "PTA" into "PA" and will be broken down into smaller segments based on the student's studio (vocal, dance, music, art, drama). These slightly smaller units than the general larger gathering of the masses will provide more personalized parental support and thus more targeted support of ELL parents. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Daniel Vecchiano 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Brooklyn High School of the Ar, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: 15K656 School DBN: Mr. Daniel Vecchiano Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member 1/1/01 Other 1/1/01 Other 1/1/01 Other 1/1/01 Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Dr. Robert J. Quinlan Mr. Anthony Gonzalez Ms. Michelle Hubbard Ms. Marion Samuels Ms. Jiazi Lin / Mandarin Ms. Bianca Paz / Special Educa Ms. Miriam Medina Ms. Anita Skop Mr. David Olesh 1/1/01 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 7  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 8  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 9 
