 14K685 School Name: EL PUENTE ACADEMY FOR PEACE AND JUSTICE Principal: TINA LEE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 14K685 El Puente Academy 331400011685 9-12 250 Hooper Street, Brooklyn, NY 11211 718-387-1125 Phone Number: 718-387-4469 Fax: Tina Lee tlee21@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Tina Lee Joseph Matunis Samantha Gardner Maribel Rodriguez Samantha Gardner Genesys Salcedo Christopher Green Clara Waloff District Information Geographical District: 14 Kathy Reifield-Pelles Superintendent: 335 Adams Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 Superintendent’s Office Address: KRehfield@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-923-5181 Phone Number: 718-923-5145 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5618 Phone Number: 718-935-2246 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Tina Lee Joseph Matunis Samantha Gardner Maribel Rodriguez Genesis Salcedo Christopher Green Clara Waloff Maria Rodriguez Juana Quezada Tina Lee *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Staff   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Roselyn Fenton Member/Staff Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of El Puente Academy for Peace and Justice is to inspire and nurture leadership for peace and justice. To this end, the Academy is guided by four core principles that serve as the foundation for all administrative, academic, programmatic and institutional development. These are creating community, love and caring, mastery and peace and justice. The Academy strives to achieve its vision in these three ways: by transforming its members into a comprehensive community learning institution; by integrating the resources of both the school and those of our community based organization, El Puente; and by supporting the holistic development and the highest levels of   achievement of Academy students, facilitators and adult members, including those with physical, emotional, developmental, or learning disabilities. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. El Puente Academy for Peace and Justice is a comprehensive high school, offering a rigorous integrated, project focused academic program that is a national model and has a twenty-one year record of success. Small heterogeneous classes of 22-27 students and our Sankofa (9th and 10th grade) and Liberation (11th and 12th grade) Academies make up the foundation of the Academy’s community for learning and development. All students travel in small learning communities and participate in interest/gender based advisories that focus on leadership development and civic engagement. Integrated team teaching supports an integrated/interdisciplinary approach to curriculum and instruction. These teams include not only licensed teachers but also artists and community consultants from El Puente and other organizations within our extensive network of partners. Core curricular subjects together with the visual and performing arts are taught thematically through the integration of the humanities and sciences. Learning is experiential with students engaging in various performance-based projects throughout the year that focus on community development and human rights issues. All projects must contain not only elements of intellectual rigor and critical thinking but visible outcomes and impact for the larger community. Students are facilitated through a process of observation, reflection, analysis and action that is documented through various performance based tasks that include journals, research papers (and other standard forms of expository and creative writing), group and/or individual investigations, experiments, surveys, reports, presentations, on-going community action initiatives as well as video, dramatic performances and fine arts exhibitions. All of these, together with teacher prepared content-based tests, make up the framework for portfolios prepared and presented for assessment. As a member of the New York Performance Based Consortium we had a variance from Regents, the exception being the Comprehensive English Examination. These structures allow us to offer small class sizes and effectively personalize rigorous instruction and create a supportive environment to meet the academic and socio-emotional needs of individual students and their families. Our school believes that students learn best when they are given the opportunity to learn content by becoming the subject of their education. In doing so, our students are given multiple opportunities to engage in learning projects/activities that are connected to who they are as a learner individually and within a community of learners. These projects require that teachers take time to collaborate in planning and designing curriculum and assessments. It gives our Sankofa (9th & 10th)/Liberation (11th & 12th) grade team of teachers a holistic picture of what students know and are able to do. Integration of the arts and project based learning allows teachers the opportunity to create more structured projects and experiences that are aligned to the CCLS, will connect students learning to their experiences and create more opportunities for differentiation and points of integration. We use our existing meeting times to produce goals in grade teams and plans to implement and also track using quantitative and qualitative data. We also meet in departments discuss best practices and supporting students. In addition, other teams such as the ENL team, the HIP (holistic individualized process team which uses restorative practices and preventative measures to ensure a safe and successful culture of the school), and the student support team (for SWD) meet regularly and hold staff development for their colleagues. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 0  24% of our students are SWD's and 15% are ELL's. We have experienced an increase in the number of 12:1:1 and SIFE students entering the school in the past two years. We are in the process of restructuring our ICT and ELL program to more effectively meet student needs and to build the capacity of our teachers to be able to meet their needs as well. We ensure that services are being provided such as counseling, speech, testing, etc. Any student who needs a one to one paraprofessional is also provided with the support, but also enhances the learning experience for the whole class. We also recognize and support students in their social emotional development and use the arts as an avenue to express themselves in electives in through projects in their core classes. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Based on our School Quality Guide 2017-2018 report, and in alignment with the Framework for Great Schools, we have made the most progress with our Collaborative Teachers indicator. Our work as a Learning Partners Program Host School re-focused us to create more effective collaborations between teachers, teaching artists, and para-professionals. Our teachers, SPED and ENL Coordinators created a series of cross curricular PBATS that each grade participated in. The collaborations created multiple opportunities for our Highly Effective teachers to work with and support our newer teachers in developing strong curriculum and meeting the needs of all of our students. To build upon that work this year, we will offer a four part series of family/community workshops that will extend out of core academic and arts based projects students are working on in classes. We aim to build the capacity of parents/families to support the academic and socio-emotional learning of their children in an inclusive community setting. Our teachers will continue to collaborate on developing integrated curriculum and project based assessments that will provide students with an in depth, holistic understanding of content and skills. We will also continue to use student led workshops as assessments that allow students to engage and share their voice, knowledge, and in-depth understandings of content through a collaborative learning experience. One of the only indicators that was below city/borough average was "classroom behavior" and "academic press." Through initiatives such as "College Access for All," "Peer Forward," and the "Learning Partners Program," we are sharing practices, implementing structures, and planning with students to create a stronger college going culture. We are also continuing to plan and facilitate their learning through opportunities in the classroom, workshops, and performances that embedded in their existing coursework to increase academic press. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 14K685 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 236 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 5 3 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 14 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 84.7% % Reduced Lunch 19.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 89.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.21 0% 25% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 81% 4% 56.1% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 94 93 83.4% 1.3% 22.5% 7.2% 0.4% 2.5% 2 19% 7.1 N/A N/A 5% 2% 75.0% N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. El Puente Academy for Peace and Justice analyzed course passing rates, progress reports, School Quality Guide Report, report cards, NYSESLAT, DYO Assessment Data, PSAT pass/fail rates, and Where are they now reports to determine this goal. We have identified the need to provide more structured and personalized support for our 12th grade students to successfully meet graduation requirements. Strengths  4.41 rating on Rigorous Instruction indicator on School Quality Guide Report.  4.14 rating on the Collaborative teachers indicator on the School Quality Guide Report.  4.47 rating on the Trust indicator on the School Quality Guide Report.  60% of our SWD's passed the ELA exam, 46% of them scored a 75 or above.  75% of our ELL's passed the ELA exam.  70% of our seniors earned a grade of competent or above on their graduation level PBATS.  90% of ELL’s scored a competent or above on their Senior Graduation PBATS. Needs:  Our graduation rates decreased from a 77% to a 56%, back to 78%. We do not want a drop again, especially that low.  66% of our 12th graders scored a competent or above on their Graduation PBATS.  32% of our SWD's did not meet graduation level requirements and will be returning as seniors this year.  We will have 70 students programmed as seniors this year, making it our largest senior class ever.  71% of our third year students earned 10 or more credits last year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 3  By June of 2019, 80% of our seniors will have met graduation requirements. This will be measured by the appropriate cohort. As first and second trimester end, there will be credit analysis and each student in the cohort to ensure they are on track to graduate on time. If not, there will be communication with families and a plan for them. 4 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All 12th grade students 9/7/2018-6/20/2019 Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In addition to Advance Observations, School leaders will conduct learning walk- throughs and meet with 12th grade teacher teams to to analyze ongoing sets of assessment data, to create personalized support and intervention plans to ensure successful completion of graduation level PBATS and credit accumulation.. . . Principal, Assistant Principal, ELL Lead Teacher, 12th grade teacher team, Guidance counselors, Special Education teachers, Para-Professionals, parent and family coordinator. Principal, Assistant Principal, ELL Lead Teacher, 12th grade teacher team, Guidance counselors, Special Education teachers, Para-Professionals, parent and family coordinator. Principal, Assistant Principal, ELL Lead Teacher, 12th grade teacher team, Guidance counselors, Special Education teachers, Para-Professionals, parent and family coordinator. Principal, Assistant Principal, ELL Lead Teacher, 12th grade Our ELL and SPED Committees will facilitate ongoing professional development sessions for staff and workshops for parents/families to build the collective capacity to meet the needs of our increasing ELL and SWD population All 12th grade students 9/7/2018-6/20/2019 . Our ELL/SPED Committee will design an AM/extended day program that will provide personalized instructional and socio-emotional support for all 12th grade students. All 12th grade students 9/7/2018-6/20/2019 Our Holistic Student Support Team will meet monthly to design a holistic individualized student action plan to ensure that 12th grade students are on track to complete their PBATS and meet All 12th grade students 9/7/2018-6/20/2019 5  graduation requirements. We will redesign our senior mentoring program to more efficiently met the needs of our growing population. . 3b – Parent and Family Engagement teacher team, Guidance counselors, Special Education teachers, Para-Professionals, parent and family coordinator. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and families will be invited to attend workshops throughout the year to develop their ability to support their children's academic and socio-emotional development. They will work with our Parent Coordinator and Student support team. It will involve, but not be limited to: support on the school-wide grading system, becoming acclimated to what a Consortium school is, what projects, tests, etc. are expected in each grade, supporting students in their socio-emotional needs as well as academic, and so on. These will be provided in English with Spanish translation available (80%+ population is Latino). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Our ELL and SPED lead teachers, Assistant Principal, guidance counselor, and bilingual paraprofessional, and Parent Coordinator. 2. Our ELL and SPED lead teachers, Assistant Principal, guidance counselor, and bilingual paraprofessional, and FSC liaison. SWP, Tax Levy and Title III funds will be used to fund partnership between our 12th grade team, ELL and SPED Coordinators, and parents/families. 3. SWP, Tax Levy, and Title III funds will be used to fund our extended day programming, and guidance counselor. Our ELL/SPED lead teachers, Assistant Principal, bilingual guidance counselor, and bilingual paraprofessional, and12th grade team will meet monthly to design curriculum and assess student progress. SWP, Tax Levy, and Title III funds will be used to fund professional development activities and teaching materials for staff via per session, per diem, and any appropriate resources needed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will assess progress towards this goal three times a year, once in December, March, and then June. Student data will be used to adjust the programming, and drive curriculum and professional development. Protocols such as DFS (Data, feedback, strategy) will also be implemented in the middle of each trimester, in November, January, and May. 6  DFS will give opportunities for staff to assess students overall progress, and make their own SMART goals for their curriculum. This will further ensure 80% of graduating cohort successfully finish on time in June 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We will use HSST/STARS Data, graduation tracker, and internal Portfolio PBAT Data Tracker. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? El Puente Academy for Peace and Justice analyzed course passing rates, progress reports, report cards, and DYO Assessment Data to determine this goal. As part of the Framework for Great Schools set forth by New York City Department of Education; we have identified the need to engage all students in Common Core aligned project based assessments in core academic areas to effectively support our students in preparation for ELA exams, Graduation Level Portfolios, and college/career readiness. 80% of students, including ELL’s and SWD’s will score a competent or above on these assessments. One of the school’s strengths is including all learners such as ELLs and SWDs in engaging work, discussions, and student work products. Strengths:  4.? rating on our Supportive Environment Indicator on the School Quality Guide Report.  70+% of SWD's graduate in 4 years  80+% of ELL's graduate in 4 years.  All students are programmed for TRIBES, our advisory program, to support with instructional and socio-emotional development.  All 12th grade students are assigned a staff Mentor to support with the graduation process. Needs:  Our graduation rates decreased from a 77% to a 56% (2017) and went back up to 78% (2018). We want to ensure that our rate stays up.  44% of 12th grade students scored below a competent on one or more graduation level PBATS.  66% of 12th grade students scored a competent or above on Graduation level PBATS. 8  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 95% of Students will engage in three common core aligned performance based assessments in Math, ELA, Social Studies, Science and Art. In conjunction, 100% of students will participate in Tribes (advisories) to address social-emotional learning, receive extra support, and guidance. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The Humanities (English and History), Math, Art and Science Departments will meet monthly to assess student work, and develop project based assessments that are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards, and align the four year course sequence to the Common Core Learning Standards. Each department will create/lead an activity for parents/families to support their understanding of the CCLS so they may academically support their children. The Humanities (English and History), Math, Art and Science Departments will meet monthly to develop common assessments to determine student progress towards Common Core Learning Standards across the grades and subject areas, and use the results of the assessments to adjust curricula, instruction, and assessments. School leaders will provide teachers with actionable feedback and strategies based on qualitative/quantitative data from observations, walkthroughs, and school wide assessments. 9 th -12th Grade 9/7/2018-6/20/2019 Content Teachers will meet with Special Education and ELL teachers in grade teams once a month to examine student work and implement best practices and strategies to effectively provide multiple entry points for students in these subgroups. School leaders will provide teachers with actionable feedback and strategies based on qualitative/quantitative data from observations, walkthroughs, and school wide assessments. SWD and ELL Students in grades 9-12 9/7/2018-6/20/2019 Tribe/Advisory teachers will meet with grade team teachers to review student spotlights aimed at supporting their academic an socio -emotional development., 9th-12th Grade 9/7/2018-6/20/2019 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 9 th -12th Grade 9/7/2018-6/20/2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Peer Collaborative teacher, Model Teachers, Sped And ELL Coordinators, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator, and CBO partner. Principal, Assistant Principal, Model Teachers, Sped And ELL Coordinators, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator, and CBO partner Principal, Assistant Principal, Model Teachers, Sped And ELL Coordinators, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator, and CBO partner Principal, Assistant Principal, Model Teachers, Sped And ELL Coordinators, Guidance Counselors, Parent 0  3b – Parent and Family Engagement Coordinator, and CBO partner How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and families will be invited to attend workshops throughout the year to develop their ability to support their children's academic and socio-emotional development. They will work with our Parent Coordinator and Student support team. This will be done in English and Spanish. The needs of parents will come from the parents and work with partnerships outside of school and in the community. For example: socio-emotional support for teenagers via Thrive NYC, college application help and information from NYU and Peer Forward, stress relief and quilting from our community quilter/teaching artist, etc. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Math, Humanities, Art, and Science Teachers, Lead teachers, SPED and ELL Coordinators, Advisors, CBO Partners, Teaching Artists, Common Core Aligned curriculum guides, Global Justice Institute Curriculum Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA X Title II, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will assess progress towards this goal six times this year, once after midterms and once after finals every trimester. The student data collected each trimester will be used to make necessary adjustments to our implementation plan. By June of 2019, all students will have engaged in common core aligned units of study in Math, Science, English, Art and Social Studies. Between September 7, 2018 and June 19, 2019, will assess progress towards this goal five times this year, once after midterms and once after finals every trimester. The student data collected will be used to make necessary adjustments to our implementation plan. By June 19 of 2019, all students will have engaged in project based common core aligned assessments in Math, Science, English, Art and Social Studies 1  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Facilitate a student led workshop through Tribes, Electives, or Core Classes. We will use school schedules, progress reports, pass/fail rates, and attendance to assess progress towards goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. El Puente Academy for Peace and Justice analyzed course passing rates, progress reports, report cards, and DYO Assessment Data to determine this goal. As part of the Framework for Great Schools set forth by New York City Department of Education; we have identified the need to boost student engagement through grade based integrated projects rooted in social justice that integrate the arts. Projects will be designed by teachers in grade teams and will be supported by the Integrated Arts Design Team, Model. Strengths:  4.57 rating on Collaborative Teachers indicator on NYC School Quality Guide.  80% of teachers participated in grade based collaborations to design and implement an integrated curricular project for their courses.  10 point increase in 6 year graduation rate  We are a host school for the Learning Partners Program with a focus on integrated projects. Needs:  11th grade students did not participate in interdisciplinary grade based project.  47.4 % of students in the lowest third earned in year 3 earned 10 or more credits  70.1 % of students in year 3, grade 11, earned 10 or more credits. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019 90% of students will participate in a grade based integrated arts project. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will meet in Grade Teams once a month to design and assess integrated projects that will be presented during assessment weeks and cultural arts days. They will also come up with goals that come from data and is tracked with data to ensure progress. Teachers will meet in Grade Teams Once every Trimester to look at student work and presentations to assess progress towards goal. Teacher Leaders will facilitate the meetings. This will be done with "Data, feedback, strategy" which aggravates data and allows teachers to pinpoint subgroups that may be falling behind on specific skills. As teachers analyze, compare, and discuss, they collectively come up with a game plan for students to increase success across the grade. Each grade team also includes support staff and/or guidance personnel to add a lens of emotional support. School leaders will provide actionable feedback based on observations and walk-throughs to support the development of rigorous arts projects and effective collaborations in teams. There will also be professional development in whole, small, or one on one groups. 9- 12 Grades 9/7/2018-6/20/2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Model Teachers, Sped And ELL Coordinators, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator, and CBO partner. 9-12 Grades 9/7/2018-6/20/2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Model Teachers, Sped And ELL Coordinators, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator, and CBO partner 9-12 grades 9/7/2018-6/20/2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Model Teachers, Sped And ELL Coordinators, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator, and CBO partner. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 4  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and families will be invited to attend workshops throughout the year to develop their ability to support their children's academic and socio-emotional development. They will work with our Parent Coordinator and Student support team. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Math, Humanities, Art, and Science Teachers, Lead teachers, Integrated Arts Design Team, SPED and ELL Coordinators, Advisors, CBO Partners, Teaching Artists, Artivate Curriculum, and Global Justice Institute Curriculum. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will assess progress towards this goal six times this year, once after midterms and once after finals every trimester. The student data collected each trimester will be used to make necessary adjustments to our implementation plan. By June of 2019, 100% of students will have engaged in common core aligned units of study in Math, Science, English, Art and Social Studies. Between September 7, 2018 and June 20, 2019 will assess progress towards this goal five times this year, once after midterms and once after finals every trimester. The student data collected will be used to make necessary adjustments to our implementation plan. By June of 2019, all students will have engaged in project based common core aligned assessments in Math, Science, English, Art and Social Studies Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will review transcripts, scholarship reports, and Curriculum maps to assess progress towards moving onto the next grade and for seniors: to graduate in June 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on school survey results, ADVANCE Observation Data, teacher surveys, and Quality Review we have identified the need to create a comprehensive targeted professional development plan to support teachers and support staff develop their craft by June 2018. School leadership, peer collaborative and model teachers will support in building the capacity of newer teachers through Inter-visitations and classroom learning labs. Strengths:  4.14 rating on Effective School leadership indicator on NYC School Quality Guide.  Three Teachers have been certified as Model teachers through the NYCDOE Learning Partners Program  We are a HUB school for the NYC Men Teach Initiative.  We are a host school through the Learning partners program.  Needs:  We have 3 new teachers who will require more intense teacher development support.  Model teachers are programmed for less hours in the classrooms with students.  Teacher partnerships and collaborations will require more support to develop cohesive best practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 7  Principal will collaborate with Assistant Principal, Academy Leadership Circle, Model Teachers, ELL/SPED Coordinator to develop a professional development series that is tailored to meet the needs of teachers and support staff by October of 2018 which will be constantly revisited and changed due to student needs. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The Academy Leadership Circle will meet twice a year to design a series of targeted professional development sessions based on ADVANCE Data and Teacher team work Instructional Staff Grades 9-12 9/7/2018-6/20/2019 Support Staff 9/7/2018-6/20/2019 School leaders, Teacher Leaders, SPED/ELL Coordinator School leaders, Teacher Leaders, SPED/ELL Coordinator The Academy Leadership Circle and lead guidance counselors will meet twice a year to develop a targeted series of Professional development sessions for support staff aimed at sharing best practices in advisories, and with effectively supporting students with social emotional growth. The Academy Leadership Circle will design a series of Team Building Activities that will establish trust and provide multiple opportunities for staff to know one another and develop as a team. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Staff 9/7/2018-6/20/2019 School leaders, Teacher Leaders, SPED/ELL Coordinator How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and families will be invited to attend workshops throughout the year to develop their ability to support their children's academic and socio-emotional development. They will work with our Parent Coordinator and Student support team. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will leverage our model and peer collaborative teachers, ENL and SPED Coordinators to support with developing and facilitating the professional development sessions and sharing fo best practices. We will use per session and per diem funds to pay for class coverage and work that happens after school. We will utilize the Handbook for professional learning as a resource to guide and support the work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 9  X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will assess progress towards our professional development plan two times a year, once in January and again in June of 2019. We will survey staff and/or ask them in supervisory meetings what their needs are, assess data from observations, and use data from the 2017-2018 School Survey to meet the pedagogical and cultural support needed to ensure successful planning, collaboration, trust building, classroom management, etc. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use the Danielson Rubric and Advance Teacher observation reports to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the School Survey results, and on Parent Workshop attendance this year, we identified a need to create more opportunities to engage parents in their children’s learning and improve our partnerships. Strengths:  4.19 on Effective Leadership according to parents/families & 3.95 on Strong Family/Community Ties NYC School Quality Guide Report 2017-2018.  70% of ELL parents/families have attended school events/performance based assessments for their child.  75% of parents/families attended our annual honors gala dinner. Needs: Small number of parents attended parent meetings last year.   30% of parents attended cultural arts event days/workshops  Parental Involvement in Schools was only 79% positive according to the School Quality Guide Report 2017-2018, which was lower than the borough and city average. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 1  By June 19, 2019, 70% of parents will attend two workshops, parent meetings or cultural arts days. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The Academy Leadership Circle, College Counselor, Parent Coordinator and CBO Partner will meet once a month to design a series of targeted parent workshops with a rotating, am/pm schedule so different groups of parents can attend. The workshops will focus on College Readiness, Supporting my child’s learning at home, engaging in difficult conversations with my child. The SLT will create a survey of parent interests and needs to develop more topics. We will make phone calls home, send letters to parents/families, and utilize the SLT/PA to support outreach to parents. School Leaders will meet with the design team and grade teams to create a calendar of parent visitation days during assessments and arts days. There will be increased outreach to parents on those days available in English and in Spanish. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 9-12 9/7/2018-6/20/2019 9-12, ELL’s, SWD’s 9/7/2018-6/20/2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Director of Parent and Community Engagement, College Counselor, SLT, CBO Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Director of Parent and Community Engagement, SLT, CBO If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Parents and families will be invited to attend workshops throughout the year to develop their ability to support their children's academic and socio-emotional development. They will work with our Parent Coordinator and Student support team. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal and Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Community Associates, Director of Community Engagement, CBO, Teaching Artists. 3  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will assess progress towards having 65% of parents attend two workshops, parent meetings or cultural arts days, two times a year- once in January and again in June Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will review attendance and sign in sheets as well as survey results from parent events throughout the year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students in the lowest third in ELA Mathematics Students in the lowest third in math Science Students in the lowest third in Science Social Studies Students in the lowest third in History Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Must attend tutoring sessions that support in developing reading and writing strategies.. Students will learn about strategies to draw meaning from text. They will use syntactic, graph phonic and semantic strategies to decode meaning. Students identified as low performers in mathematics are mandated to attend tutoring sessions and math labs to support acquisition and development of fundamental math skills. We provide before and after school tutoring for students in the 9 th -11 th grade to support their ability to comprehend scientific methods and procedures. Students who are struggling in their History classes are Service is provided in small groups, one to one, and during tutoring. Service is provided before, after, and during the school day. Service is provided in small groups, one to one, and during tutoring Service is provided in small groups, one to one, and during tutoring- before, after, and during the school day. Service is provided in small groups, one to one, and during tutoring. Service is provided in small groups, one to one, and during tutoring Service is provided in small groups, one to Service is provided in small groups, one to 5  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students in the lowest third and those identified by their teachers as at risk based on grades or socio-emotional data. one, and during tutoring. one, and during tutoring Service is provided in small groups during advisories, during one to one or group HIP/guidance sessions, through one to one mentoring. Service is provided in small groups during the day in advisories, during one to one or group HIP/guidance sessions, through one to one mentoring mandated to attend tutoring sessions and Research workshops to support and develop their ability to conduct research, read and write for information, and comprehension of History Context. The guidance counselor and social worker meet with students on a one-to-one basis and/or in groups to engage them in a holistic individualized program (HIP). Students learn how to focus on their personal development, in body, mind spirit, and community. 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are five students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will be offering breakfast and snack programs to students as well as morning and evening curricular activities, academic tutoring mornings and afternoons and paid internships. These internships include a tutoring and personal development component as well as one on one time with supervising teacher. Also, we provide personal school supplies and basic emergency supplies. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. There are several things that we do in order to attract HQT and maintain HQT, such as: Rigorous Multi-Tiered Hiring Process (Recruitment): Our hiring process includes various steps in order to attract and maintain HQTs. We begin with attending diverse job fairs, posting on Idealist, and emailing our job posting to various listserves. We invite select candidates to interview. The interview includes: a classroom observation, a mock lesson with post-observation, a group interview with the committee, and a writing sample. From this process we have been able to hire exceptional candidates that believe in our mission. Detailed Job Posting (Recruitment) : Our job posting delineates what a teacher needs to have in order to meet our expectations. Specific attendance PD for all staff (Support) : During our full staff retreat in August, we present the year’s attendance goal and allow teachers to develop their individual plans in order to support the larger goal (a 3% school wide increase). We will continue this work through monthly onsite all-staff PDs. The administrative team coordinates and facilitates the all-staff PDs and attendance is a consistent area to return to and revisit as a team. Frequent Observations (Support): The principal and assistant principal observes every teacher at least three times during each term (cycle). During these observations attendance interventions and strategies are addressed individually and addressed in the post-observation. Teacher Leadership (Support and Retention): We have a teacher leader who is able to train their peers, teaching artists, and will have a role in developing the trainings for families and parents. We have identified additional funding in order to compensate this teacher for their time and additional training. Our teacher leadership position allow teacher to receive targeted support and leadership opportunities in area of interest: technology, new teacher development, data, student voice and leadership, and curriculum development. 9  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We will provide ongoing professional development sessions for staff to enhance teacher effectiveness using the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Our staff will meet once a week in departments to further develop and assess Common Core aligned units of study in all core academic areas. We will meet in grade teams two times each trimester to review student data and create holistic action plans to support students development of attainment of mastery targets. We will provide ongoing professional development sessions for staff on the use of technology in the classroom, project based learning, culturally relevant education and self-directive improvement system. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our Academy leadership circle is comprised of two model teachers, one peer collaborative teacher, our Special Education coordinator, our ELL coordinator, our parent and community coordinator, the Assistant Principal and Principal. We meet weekly to discuss school wide initiatives, data trends, and to design professional development 0  plans, based on multiple sets of data, to meet the needs of our school community. The data is derived from learning walkthroughs, Advance observations, OORS, interim assessment and testing data. Teachers are actively included in deciding what professional development they would like to receive as well as what best practices they would like to share out with colleagues. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A,B,C,D,E,6,7,8,9 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 186,505.00 Title II, Part A Federal N/A Title III, Part A Federal 11,200.00 Title III, Immigrant Federal N/A Tax Levy (FSF) Local 1,904,896.00 X N/A X N/A X N/A 5A,B,C,D,E,6,7,8,9 N/A 5A,B,C,D,E,6,7,8,9 1  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 2   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 3  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. El Puente Academy for Peace and Justice, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students El Puente Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 4  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 5  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership 6  Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 7  ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● hosting events to support, men asserting leadership in education for their children. parents/guardians, grandparents and foster parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand; School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) El Puente Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 8  ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 9  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by:    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 0  ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. ● 1  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: El Puente Academy This school is (check one): DBN: 14k685 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 1 2 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The goals of this program are to have students express themselves on issues that deeply affect them through poetry, personal narratives modeled and inspired by August Wilson’s Century Cycle, creative writing, reading, dialogue. Students will also understand what roles they can take in creating to support a more just and humane society. Students will study August Wilson’s Century Cycle. They will exhibit an understanding of August Wilson’s Century Cycle plays by: 1. Reading all ten plays from August Wilson’s Century Cycle: • Gem of the Ocean • Joe Turner’s Come and Gone • Ma Rainey’s Black Bottom • The Piano Lesson • Seven Guitars • Fences • Two Trains Running • Jitney • King Hedley II • Radio Golf 2. Learning to conduct research based on August Wilson’s ten-play cycle chronicling the African-American journey through the 20th century. 3. Exploring the plays and related readings representing each decade of the Century Cycle. 4. Identifying and discussing recurring themes among the ten plays. 5. Conducting a case study and analysis of Pittsburgh’s Hill District and compare and contrast it to Williamsburg Brooklyn. 6. Discussing and learning why August Wilson took on such an immense project. 7. Discussing August Wilson’s body of work and understanding why it is so important to the American theater. This after school class is designed to promote language development by utilizing balanced literacy strategies, challenging students to develop reading and writing skills in English. And dealing with the social emotional skills associated with acclimating to a new culture and learning a second language via gender, drama and band performance groups. Through out the course students will participate in different exercises that will develop their reading, writing, listening and speaking skills via a holistic approach incorporating all of the previously mentioned disciplines. The targeted population is 48 ELLs in 9th through the 12th grade are invited to join the program. The rationale is that although we supported a lot of students to achieve proficiency in English, 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information there still remains a number that are at performance level "entering, emerging or transitioning" and have not met their targeted AYP progress in English. An ENL certified teacher will provide instruction Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays,Thursdays, and Fridays mornings 8:15- 8:55am. There will also be Tuesday and Thursday afternoon sessions from 3:35-5:00 pm. The language of instruction is English. The Title III program will use the No Glamour Language and Reasoning workbook, Luna, Luna, August Wilson’s Century Cycle, Langston Hughes anthologies, essays by Booker T Washington and W.E.B DuBois. The class will begin in November and end in May (total of 25 weeks). Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our high quality professional development activities demonstrate an alignment to the instructional program being delivered throughout the regular school day. We recognize, however that our after school program also requires this type of support. The *Biliteracy committee (Also known as ENL Team) has therefore designed a work embedded professional development series with the structure of our Title III program in mind for pedagogical staff. Our Title III teacher will facilitate the workshops. Meetings will be held after school at no cost to Title III. Professional Development Workshops with ELL Focus: 1. Encouraging ELL student language development (3rd week of November) 2. Writing Workshops for ELL students (4th week of January) 3. Speaking Intensive for ELL students (1st week of March) 4. Differentiation for ELL students (1st week of April) In addition, the ESL teacher will facilitate a focused study group to which he will invite ELL student's teachers from different subject areas (3 teachers). This group is a learning community that meets after school on Wednesdays, 3:00 - 4:00pm from November to April (10 sessions). These study group times are specifically for the Title III teachers to meet track and discuss the progress of the students in the Title III program and to analyze, review, and discuss professional literature (to include Academic Language for English Language Learners and Struggling Readers, How to help Students succeed Across Content Areas, by Yvonne S. Freeman, and other materials) to inform their teaching and practice. Professional books for the study group will be at no cost to the Title III. *The Biliteracy/ENL Team is a group of staff members who are a part of the English Language Arts department and the English as a New Language department to discuss, plan, and strategize ways to best support students for their graduation PBATs, ELA Regents exam, and college readiness. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration  topics to be covered 4  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities  name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: Parent Involvement is a key component to our program. We offer opportunities for parents of ELLs to become involved with their child’s ENL instruction. We also offer a program called the Lending Library, which is a book club for parents. The books read are in the parents' native language. The Lending Library meets once a trimester on a Saturday from 10-12pm. These sessions be held the last Saturday of November, March and May. We also offer workshops for parents of our students served through our Title III program once a trimester, on Saturday to provide them with sessions for understanding the NYSELAT exam, ELA Regents Exam, and strategies they may use to help their son/daughter. Title III funds will be used for activities to assist parents of youth offering comprehensive community service to help parents become more active participants in the education of their children. Title III funds will be used to provide family literacy training, parent outreach and activities. The parent workshops are designed specifically for Title III parents to help provide them with support in understanding the various exams their son/daughter is required to take as well as how our program is helping students prepare for these exams. In addition, Title III parents will learn effective strategies to help their son/daughter with language acquisition. Translation services will be provided to parents from our staff members who are fluent in the students' native language. In addition, the ENL teacher and Parent Coordinator can communicate clearly with parents in their native language. Additional services will be requested through the NYC DOE translation and interpretation unit as needed. We encourage the participation of multiple representatives from the families of each of our 33 ELLs. Parents of 33 ELLs will be invited. One ESL teacher supported by the Parent Coordinator will present three two hour workshops for ELL parents. The parent workshop topics include the following: Understanding the NYSESLAT Exam (1st week of March 12-2pm), Understanding the ELA Regents Exam: How Can Poetry and Memoir writing Help with Language Development (1st week of January 10-12pm) and English Through the Arts: How Can the Arts Help My Child with English? (2nd week of April 10-12 pm). The ENL teachers and parent coordinator will reach out to parents of title III participants and inform them of all of these supplementary opportunities via phone calls, email and letter sent home with students and through the mail. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $9,892.00  Per session  Per diem Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. This will compensate staff to support students outside of their normal work hours. They include, but are not limited to: tutoring before or after school in 5 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. academics, connections to art events/celebrations, etc. Purchased services  High quality staff $0 $0 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other $0 $0 $2,474.00 This will be used to supply supplies or food for supplemental programming for the activities stated above. For example, breakfast would be provided and used to increase attention for morning tutoring and support services. If books or other supplemental resources are needed for activities in or outside of the school day hours, they would be be purchased using these funds. TOTAL $12,366.00 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 14 School Name El Puente Academy Borough Brooklyn School Number 685 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Wanda Vazquez Coach Joe Matunis ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Carlos Rosello Teacher/Subject Area Ruth Celis/Spanish Teacher/Subject Area Andrew Kirby/ENL Related-Service Provider Rasheda Smith/Sped Superintendent Kathy Pelles Assistant Principal Tina Lee Coach Carlos Rosello School Counselor Ana Lazala Parent Samantha Gardner Parent Coordinator Rosie Fenton Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 230 7 Total number of ELLs 53 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 23.04%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We refer to past NYSESLAT scores and at times use the Fountas and Pinnell assessment system. 15 % of our ELL students are expanding in listening and speaking. 12% percent of our ELL students are emerging in reading and writing and 38% of our ELL students reach a proficient level. 16% of our students are beginners in reading and writing. 10% of our students are advanced while only 18% have reached proficiency levels in reading and writing. This data informs the school that our students are improving in reading and writing activities while listening and speaking needs to be improved on. This information informs the ESL and content area teachers as to what direction instructional and supplemental programs need to go so as to meet our ELL student's needs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The ENL teacher collaborates with content area teachers and develop strategies that help improve and strengthen these four modalities. We also use teacher-created assessments and meet bi-weekly in departments to review data particular to ELL 8  students and create improvement plans based on the assessments. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Periodic check-ins such as progress reports, student review check ins, staff meetings, major assessment feedback reports are studied by the ESL teacher and the ELL committee. Strategies and focus shifts according to the student's abilities and needs. We use results from the NYSESLAT, ELA regents exams, teacher created interim assessments, and credit accumulation rates to determine if ELL students are making progress towards AYP. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have student review where we conduct data feedback strategy sessions. Based on our findings, we plan accordingly and create an action plan that will support the student in his or her academic endeavors. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The framework "Strong Core Instruction for ELLs" has helped us create professional development workshops for our teachers that have allowed them to understand the complexities of language acquisition as well as providing specific strategies they can use to address the varying tiers of learning English. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The ELL student population has vastly improved in the reading and writing categories because instruction has been specifically tailored to those needs, however more deliberate attention needs to be paid to listening and speaking skills within the classroom context to support those skills. The NYSITELL data shows that two students in ninth grade who were tested the previous year were eligible for ELL services and entered as beginner ELL students. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We share findings with department supervisors and give recommendations concerning which direction to proceed. After reviewing this data, we co-construct plans of action that reflect the findings, thus making the necessary adjustments to better serve and speak to the students' needs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. a. ESL instruction is delivered throughout all core academic classes by infusing ESL startegies throughout the curriculum. All teachers receive professional development instruction on how to teach curriculum using ESL strategies. In addition, students receive mandated ESL instruction depending on their proficiency levels throughout the school day. ESL students also receive native langauge instruction throughout the school day to ensure their advancement in their native language and it is integrated in 90% of the core classes. Students who are advanced ESL receive Advanced Spanish instruction where they focus on analyzing literature in Spanish and advacned Spanish writing skills. The literacy program focuses on creating an environment that allows ELL students to be comfortable in the classroom as well as providing an increased amount of teacher to student talk ratio. Teachers use non verbal and 9  context clues to provide meaning for instruction such as picture maps, demonstrations and graphic organizers. Content area teachers also break tasks into smaller "chunks" with frequent comprehension checks and they pre teach background knowledge, vocabulary, and concepts students need for each unit. The ESL teacher also uses the push in model in content classes where he provides extra support for ESL students. b. The program model of choice is block scheduling. Classes travel together as a group throughout the school day. This ensures ESL students develop social skills with other students and it lessens the feelings of alienation which may occur to newcomer ELL's. Traveling in classes together allows students to develop one on one relationship with their teachers as well as with one another. This also allows teachers to strategically pair ELL students with support buddies to help them integrate into the school culture. We also use heterogeneous grouping with all mixed proficiency levels in each class. Heterogeneous grouping allows students of all levels to work with one another and learn from one another. Cooperative grouping techniques are used by content area teachers to help improve instruction and to ensure ELL students feel a part of the classroom. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ELL students in the entering stages of language development receive 1 unit of study in ENL instruction per week, 1 unit of study of integrated ENL and ELA instruction, and 1 unit of study of integrated in content area instruction as required under CR Part 154 . All emerging ELL students receive 90 minutes per week of ENL instruction , 1 unit of integrated ENL/ELA instruction and 90 minutes of integrated ENL/content area instruction. All Transitioning ELL students receive 180 minutes per week of ENL instruction, 90 minutes of EN:/Content area instruction and 90 minutes of integrated ENL/content area instruction. All expanding ELL students receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction, and 1 unit of ENL/Content area instruction. All commanding ELL students receive 90 minutes of integrated ELA/content area instructon. All content area classes infuse ESL strategies in the curriculum as well as the ESL coordinator and Literacy coach meet with all teachers to help support them. Strategic scheduling of classes allows all ESL students to receive their mandated services accordingly. Since students travel in groups throughout the day, it allows us to place them in ESL classes/push ins throughout the school day. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area instruction is taught in English however 90% of our teaching staff speaks Spanish, this helps them communicate effectively with all ESL students. In addition, the ESL coordinator meets with all teachers to help them differentiate their instruction to help the ELL students. He attends content area department meetings to teach facilitators ESL strategies and help during curriculum mapping sessions. Content area teachers use graphic organizers, visual representations, and scaffolding techniques to help ESL students understand content area concepts and language. Teachers also continuously model think alouds for all students and they also use Bloom's Taxonomy questioning techniques to access higher ordered thinking skills. We also have three Smartboards in the school which are used to help students acquire langauge skills. Cooperative grouping techniques are used to make information more comprehensible for ELL students. Through pull outs the ESL teacher provides support in the content area for ELL students. In addition, grammar and literacy instruction is infused into all classes. Grammar and literacy games are used as motivational techniques throughout instruction. ELL's are receiving assistance in content area classes such as Math, Science, English, and History via push in/pull out methods. Students are pulled out by the ESL teacher to provide students with extra support in the content areas according to their NYSESLAT proficiency levels. The ESL teacher provides support in the content area English in 0  student's native language which is Spanish and Arabic. Sheltered content strategies are used in all of the content areas such as slowing down, enunciating, and repeating concepts and terms in native langauge. Focusing on the facilitation of vocabulary and vocabulary building help ensure students build their proficiency levels 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ESL students also receive native langauge instruction throughout the school day to ensure their advancement in their native language. Students who are advanced ESL receive Advanced Spanish instruction where they focus on analyzing literature in Spanish and advacned Spanish writing skills. The literacy program focuses on creating an environment that allows ELL students to be comfortable in the classroom as well as providing an increased amount of teacher to student talk ratio. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Students who are identified as SIFE receive additional ESL instruction through tutoring, after school, Saturday Academy , and ESL push ins. The ESL teacher provides one on one instruction in the content areas in the students’ native language so that the material is comprehensible and yet it also promotes their second language development. In addition to extra support in the content areas, students also receive additional ESL instruction which focuses on phonemic awareness, vocabulary building, and grammar instruction. Asper CR Part 154 former Ell's are entitled to receive accommodations for two years after reaching proficiency. Ell's and former Ell's are entitled to Spanish- English translations as well as extended time on assessments. b. Students who are in US schools less than three years also receive extensive English Regents prep to ensure they are prepared for the exam. c. ELL students receiving services for four to six years need additional ESL instruction to help with language acquisition. Although our ELL students from four to six years test at the Intermediate or Advanced levels on the NYSESLAT exam, they still struggle with testing out of the program. As a result, our ESL instruction for this subgroup focuses on writing skills. Based on NYSESLAT results, this subgroup struggles the most with the writing modality. Therefore, they receive more intense writing workshops which focus on grammar skills, writing organizational skills, and the writing process. These workshops are also tailored to teach ELA Regents writing skills. In addition, an AM tutoring session is offered to this ESL subgroup students to help them acquire skills for the ELA Regents exam such as listening skills, writing about an informational passage, writing about two literary works, and writing a literary response based on a critical lens. d. Long term ELL’s also receive additional assistance. Support in instruction is provided via pull outs, push ins, and small group instruction. Continuous collaboration is ongoing between the content area teachers and the support personnel. Students receive intensive support in all content areas with a special focus on ELA to help prepare students for the Regents exam. Moreover, students identified with having special needs receive services identified in their IEP’s as well as additional ESL push in support. e. In partnership with a mentor/advisor these students will continue strengthening their English skills via narrative writing and research that speaks to needs present in their communities. They are taught how to conduct participatory action research. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers with newcomers, SIFE, long term or ELL’s with special needs use a variety of strategies with students such as: * providing good models of oral and written English 1  * developing higher ordered thinking and critical thinking skills * cooperative/collaborative grouping * emphasis on visual aids * the use of Spanish/English dictionaries, learning centers and the use of the library * teachers monitor patterns in proficiency levels and the four modalities * We use the lexia program to support ELL student development * No Glamour Language texts * Instructional strategies include, scaffolding materials, visuals, vocabulary development, translated texts, tiered instruction * We ensure ELL-SWD's receive all services mandated on their IEP's by meeting biweekly combining the ELL team with the Special education team to review student data and conduct student reviews 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL students identified as having special needs receive additional instruction in partnership between the ESL teacher and the special education teacher. Through a series of push in/ pull outs both teachers work together to provide optimum instruction for special needs ELL’s. By working together both teachers provide instruction that addresses all of student’s needs. Also, additional support is provided during early morning tutoring twice a week for 45 minutes to address this subgroups needs. Title III funds are used for a targeted intervention program. Our target population is 36 ELL students from 9th through 12th grade from Beginner to Intermediate proficiency NYSESLAT levels. The program focuses on literacy circles through performing arts. The activities and instruction will be project based. Students will write a play, short story, or poem to be performed to their parents and other young people. The reason for using performing arts is to fully engage students in an after school setting that is fun and interactive. We have individual schedules to ensure flexible programming to maximize the time spent with non disabled peers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Since we are a portfolio based school, we do not administer the math Regents exam. However, all students are required to complete and pass Math final portfolio assessments. Tutoring is offered every morning for our ELL Students and currently a Saturday program is offered as well. Supplemental Math labs were also designed to meet our student's needs. Targeted interventions for social studies include visual representations, translated texts, additonal tutoring for ELL students. Targeted interventions for science include visual representations, translated texts, additional turoing for Ell Students in Spanish. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are considering offering a drama based ELL course which will infuse literacy skills as well as speaking skills. Students will participate and perform dramatic skits based on a play they are reading and perform them for schoolwide events. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs will be discontinued 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. After school programs are advertised in our school in English and the ELL student's native language. We also do a great deal of outreach and encourage our parents to motivate their sons and daughters to attend our after school programs. All ELL 2  students are invited to all after school programs and translated versions of flyers are posted around the school. Students are invited to attend, the volleyball club, SSS, ESI, the break dancing club, and the bike club. In addition, the ELL coordinator invites and encourages all students to attend after school programming. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials that are used are No-Glamour Language and Reasoning, Latino Boom and Luna Luna. Students have access to laptops and use various online programs such as the Lexia program and Compass Learning. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Beginner Students at times are allowed to participate in seminars using their native langauge because we want their opinions and ideas to be heard. We use the native language as a strategy and slowly transition to English for the student. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We modify according to student's langauge proficiency levels and content being offered 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The instructional materials that are used are No-Glamour Language and Reasoning, Latino Boom and Luna Luna. Students have access to laptops and use various online programs such as the Lexia program and Compass Learning. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We have orientations and summer institute prior to student attending which are facilitated by the ESL teacher and parent coordinator. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? A beginner and advanced Spanish course is offered, dance, drama, art, music, knitting, and vocal are offered. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. All ELL personnel are strongly encouraged to attend ELL and Special Education workshops that are offered by the Department of Education and supporting networks. After the workshops ELL personnel are encouraged to turnkey what they learned to the ELL committee and or the school staff. a. We have weekly Title III committee meetings where strategies and approaches are shared. b. Once a week we have a Integrated Arts team which discusses ways the arts can be implemented into content courses and help with langauge development. 3  Pd dates are Mondays and Wednesdays Topics for the month of September include: Curriculum night prep, curriculum development, integration of the arts, VIP supports, SESIS training Topics for the month of October include: Attendance incentives, Holistic individualized process, ELL supports. Topics for the month of November: Data analysis, portfolio preparation, and open school prep Topics for the month of December: Portfolio presentations, portfolio process, supporting seniors Topics for the month of January: MLA presentation, integrating courses, unity day workshops. Ell teachers are encouraged to attend NYS consortium workshops to support the development of common core learning standards as well as DOE offered workshops. Specific workshops offered to teachers are Literacy across the curriculum, aligning common core standards to instruction in all the content areas, How do we support ELLs in Math and Science. These PDs will specifically support ELL teachers because they will focus on how to integrate ELL instruction in the content areas and align them to the common core standards. They will ask teachers to review the curriculum and directly connect the new common core standards to instruction with a specific lens on ELL teacher development. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Advisories are typically ELL based therefore discussing transitioning from High school to college is a topic of choice. Tea Advisories and counseling sessions which revolve around identity and the mission of the school are facilitated by staff. Prior to facilitating the course the staff is trained by our partnering community based organization whose mission is rooted in nurturing leaders for peace and justice by approaching education holistically via the development of the three domains which are Body, Mind and Spirit. Each student is assigned to an advisor and advisory. On Mondays of every week we meet as an entire school staff and on Wednesdays we separate into Sankofa and Liberation Academies. Sankofa Academy consists of 9th and 10th grade staff and Liberation consists of 11th and 12th grade staff. Once a month a professional development workshop is offered to staff with a focus on ESL instruction such as understanding the NYSESLAT exam, reading and writing in all content areas. Sign in sheets are provided and maintained with the school secretary. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parental involvement is a key component to our ESL program. We offer many opportunities for parents to become active with their child's ESL instruction. Parents are invited to attend curriculum night where they become aware of the various programs offered at El Puente and are given the opportunity to participate in our Saturday or after school language acquisition program designed for them and the School Leadership team which is made up of parents, parent coordinator and teachers. Translation services are provided by bilingual staff. If needed, the translation and interpretation unit will be notified. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents attend various activities throughout the year including parent fun night for Ell parents. In addition, they attend a variety of performances created and performed by ELL students three times per year. The ELL parent Saturday workshops also increase parental engagement and are actively attended by parents. The parent coordinator is present at all events and activities and actively reaches out to all parents to encourage their presence. 4  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Wanda Vazquez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/16/15 10/16/15 10/16/15 10/22/15 10/23/15 10/23/15 10/16/15 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 14 School Name: 685 Superintendent: Kathy Pelles The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Roselyn Fenton Parent Coordinator No No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Once students are enrolled, the ESL teacher and the Assistant principal look at Student's Home Language Surveys and keep a record of Parent's Preferred Language forms. All staff is made aware of the Parent's Preferred language and copies of anything sent home is sent in the parents preferred language. As a school founded by Latino community leaders, we have always considered translation services as a human right. It is with this framework in mind that we work towards ensuring that all the language-access needs of our parents are being met. Presently, our student population is 90% Latino, 8% African-American and 2% Caucasian respectively. From our survey of parents, 40% of Latino parents/guardians needed translation services. A list of these findings were reported to staff during Professional Development sessions. The ELL coordinator review the data from the HLIS and ATS at the beginning of the school year as well as when a student is a new admit to ensure proper translations protocol. 8  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Bengali Senufo English Spanish Bengali Senufo 46.58 52.97 0.23 0.23 English Spanish Bengali Senuto 46.12 53.65 0 0 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Curriculum Night Beginning of every trimester Parent Teacher Conference Twice a year Art Events Four times a year Freshman Orientation Once a year How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The general curricular overview is provided to parents in their preferred language. Letters are sent home in both English and parents' preferred language. All event flyers/letters sent home are sent home in both English and parents' preferred language as well as parent teacher conference announcements All information are given in the parents' preferred language. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 9  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent teacher conferences Occurs once every Trimester. Curriculum night September 27,2017 Schoolwide arts events Beginning of every trimester Senior Parent Meetings At least twice a year interpretation service(s)? Letters are sent home in both English and parents' preferred language. There are staff member available in each room or at least on each floor that can assist with translations. However, most staff already speak Spanish proficiently or better. Letters are sent home in both English and parents' preferred language. There will be at least one Spanish speaker in each room or designate area to interpret for families. Often times, some staff members and teachers speak in English and Spanish during their presentations themselves. Letters are sent home in both English and parents' preferred language. Staff and student presenters will be able to speak in both languages to families and students who may need the translation. We also keep in mind any visuals and supplies that may be needed to meet everyone's needs. Staff members meet with parents of senior students to inform them of activities, expectations, etc. Mid-year, we sit one on one with parents of seniors to inform them if their child is behind in credits, portfolios, etc. At least two Spanish speaking staff members are present to translate or speak solely in Spanish in the one on ones. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 100% of parents preferred language is either English or Spanish. As a result, all items are sent home in Spanish and they are translated for parents. At our school, 90% of our staff is fluent in Spanish and therefore we are able to communicate with these families. Parents have been notified of their rights to be communicated with in a language they understand by correspondence and through various meetings such as “Freshmen Orientation” to general parent meetings held monthly. 0  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We have had various meetings in which we have stressed the importance of our “Biliteracy Protocol” is enforced. The Biliteracy protocol requires that all major communication to parents in the domains of academic assessments, health, safety, legal matters, special education and ELL services be translated to Spanish. This also applies to one-on-one or group meetings with parents. Parents have been notified of their rights to be communicated with in a language they understand by correspondence and through various meetings such as “Freshmen Orientation” to general parent meetings held monthly. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents will receive the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities sent home by the school, and at the entrance of the school there is a sign indicating the availability of interpretation services.The committee determines within 30 days if translation or interpretation services are required by a parent who speaks the covered eight languages. We do this by interviewing the parents and making them aware of their rights to these services. The committee ensures that all communications is provided in a timely manner in the primary languages of the parents. Important communication in the domains of academic assessments, health, safety, legal matters, special education and ELL services are translated to Spanish. The Biliteracy committee provides translators at every meeting with parents that need such services. Informal meetings with parents typically occur 1 every two weeks Guidance counselors speak with parents every week dependent on the scenario Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 1  Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will administer a parent survey which will include questions directly requesting feedback on the quality of the translations and available services and whether their needs are being met so that we can restructure our program if necessary. They will be provided in Spanish and if assistance is still needed, they can come in to receive it with one of our Spanish speaking staff members. 2 
