 20K686 School Name: BROOKLYN SCHOOL OF INQUIRY Principal: ERIC HAVLIK   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Brooklyn School of Inquiry 332 00 00 10 686 K-8 50 Avenue P , Brooklyn, NY, 11204 718-621-5730 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 20K686 718-621-5735 Fax: Anna Moshura amoshura@bsi686.org School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Eric Havlik Toi Ferguson CarlieSteen and Claire Lin ToiFerguson TBD NA N/A District Information Geographical District: 20 Superintendent’s Office Address: Karina Costantino Superintendent: 415 89th St, Brooklyn, NY11209 KCostan@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 759-4912 Phone Number: (718) 759-4842 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn South Cheryl Watson-Harris FSC: Executive Director:   415 89th St., Brooklyn, 11209 or 4390 Flatlands Ave., Brooklyn, NY 11234 Executive Director’s Office Address: (cwatsonharris@gmail.com) Executive Director’s Email Address: Not available Phone Number: Not available Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Eric Havlik Toi Ferguson Claire Lin N/A N/A N/A N/A Tricia Ragone Anna Levitskiy Audrey Elias Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Teresa Mendez Debra Griner Marissa Schwartz Elizabeth Sussman Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to provide exemplary teaching targeted to the unique needs of our students who become self-directed learners and think of themselves as active members of the world community.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Brooklyn School of Inquiry (BSI) is a K-8 citywide gifted and talented school in New York City that serves students from every borough. We opened our doors in 2009 with three Kindergarten classes and one first grade class. We currently have two classes on each grade. This year we will had our second graduating class and our enrollment is roughly 535 students. The 2017-18 school year marked the beginning of BSI’s participation in the city’s Diversity in Admissions program. BSI is the city’s only city-wide gifted and talented school to participate in this program, which sets aside 40% of seats for lower-income students. An anticipated demographic change to our incoming kindergarten class will bring a welcome increase in diversity, and an imperative to serve all students from all backgrounds well. Since we are a citywide gifted and talented school and not a zoned, community school, 85% of our students arrive to school on either a NYCDOE bus provided by the Office of Pupil Transportation (OPT) or on private buses funded by those families who use them. We are an inquiry-based school with an emphasis on the arts, science and technology. Our middle school students have an option to play an instrument taught by Brooklyn Conservatory of Music instructors or engage in a fine arts or performing arts program lead by BSI arts teachers. We have a stand-alone science program for all K-8 students and in 2011 together with our partners from Teachers College Columbia University, we were awarded a National Science Foundation grant to write STEM units. At BSI, we are deeply committed to research regarding promising education practices and many of our staff present in national conferences where we share our pedagogical approach. We have built and continue to nurture a strong community based on the Tribes Agreements and Responsive Classroom approaches. Since we are not a community school, we take great pains to offer family workshops where students and faculty can share the work happening in classrooms. Since we are an inquiry-based school, families sometimes struggle with our constructivist approach which differs from that of their own childhood learning, and find it difficult to understand how they can best support their children at home. This is an area where we have both made the most growth and the area that is a key focus for us each academic year: we want to continue to strengthen the home to school connection so families understand how they can support the growth of their children. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 0  As a school that is expanding to include more students that are eligible for free/reduced price lunch through the Diversity Pilot, we are paying special attention to the needs of those students as they integrate into the community. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Progress - Collaborative Teachers, Strong Family/Community Ties and Trust Focus - Supportive Environment, specifically targeting how students feel supported in our community. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K686 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 566 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 14 2 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 28 9 10 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 22.0% % Attendance Rate 18.0% % Reduced Lunch 8.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.2% 4.9% 67.3% % Multi-Racial % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.09 0% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 92.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 100% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A YES N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A YES N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 95.5% 4.1% 6.2% 4.9% 20.0% 2.8% 2 4% 6.7 95.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: Rigorous, engaging and coherent curricula aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards Challenge: Curriculum-aligned assessment practices that inform instruction Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Teachers will align assessment, curriculum, and planning to ensure that teachers practice checks of understanding and strengths during their lessons so that adjustments are made to improve writing instruction in the elementary grades. Using 2018 NYSED item analysis and on-demand writing pieces, teachers will assess progress for each cohort and individual, with a goal of increasing the mean average of the bottom third of each cohort by 1 point on the 2019 NYSED ELA test Session 2. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional learning around the creation and implementation of an assessment strategy focused on using collected data by administering pre and post on-demand writing pieces to drive further instruction will be strategically scheduled throughout the year. All classroom and cluster teachers Begin September 2018 Eric Havlik (principal) Anna Moshura (assistant principal) K - 5 End June 2019 PD Committee Utilize SBST to meet monthly to discuss the needs and writing growth of SWD SBST Shannon Ryan, ENL Teacher Anna Moshura (assistant principal) Begin September 2018 End June 2019 Parent outreach will include Curriculum Night information sharing, inclusion on class syllabi on website and class pages, and teacher blogs, as well as an interactive presentations throughout the school year to parent body by teachers, coaches and students. All teachers, PTO, SLT and parent body Begin September 2018 Classroom Teachers End June 2019 PTO Parents Monthly grade meetings with classroom teachers that focus on looking as student work as a tool for developing cycles of inquiry around writing development. All Teachers, Parent body Begin September 2016 Eric Havlik (principal) All Teachers End June 2017 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administration will outline specifics of Rigorous Instruction goal during PTO and SLT meetings and will conduct parent grade meetings throughout the year to specifically address writing growth in students. 4  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monthly professional learning time with all staff involved. (Classroom teachers, cluster teachers, coaches, strategic support staff, resource teachers) Staff Developer - Dorothy Barnhouse and Literacy Collaborative Professional learning time allotted to staff creating and embedding rigorous, standards-based rubrics into curricular units. Use per session to create on-demand writing assessments Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administer school based on-demand writing exercises both before and after the beginning of each writing unit. The purpose of the on-demand pieces is to measure growth in the identified target group in October 2018, February 2019 and in June of 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) NYSED ELA test, Session 2 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths: · Established systems around TRIBES community building and Responsive Classroom approaches to behavior management and community building. · Professional learning for all staff working with students. · Support team available for guidance and interventions. (ELL teacher, Special Education Teacher, Tribes Curriculum Developer, Psychologist, Guidance Counselor, Occupational Therapist) · Weekly School-wide Enrichment program focusing on community-building across grades through student interest based learning. Challenges: · Normative practices and the establishment of coherence from one classroom to another Consistent support for all ELL and bilingual students through small group instruction and heterogeneous grouping. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. BSI will engage in PD and partnerships (suggesting www.bordercrossers.org or Perception Institute) to increase leadership/teacher capacity with creating culturally responsive environments. Our student demographics are likely to change, and there is abundant evidence that integrated/diverse classrooms benefit everyone, and our new students need educators who understand their strengths, identities, etc. as well as possible. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers Begin Eric Havlik Engage with professional development provider to discuss curriculum and scheduling Staff engagement of three professional development sessions with provider K-8 students and teachers September 2018 End June 2019 Anna Moshura Classroom teachers Begin September 2018 End June 2019 coaches cluster teachers Eric Havlik Anna Moshura Cluster Teachers Classroom Teachers Parent-Paid TAs paras cluster teachers Weekly vertical planning and grade level meeting with content area support staff at the meetings focusing on instruction and student progress and coherence across grades. All teachers Begin Eric Havlik September 2018 End June 2019 Anna Moshura Cluster Teachers Classroom Teachers Parent-Paid TAs paras 7 Professional Learning Committee to help identify needs and develop targeted and meaningful professional learning paths for all teachers to meet their needs and those of their classrooms. All staff Begin September 2018 End June 2019 cluster teachers Eric Havlik Anna Moshura Cluster Teachers Classroom Teachers Parent-Paid TAs paras cluster teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will contract with a vendor to provide a diversity workshop to parents. The workshop will take place in the winter and will be funded by the PTO. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Fair student funding/PTO/Teaching and Administrative Staff Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. BSI will administer student perception surveys in January of 2019. We will use the results of the student perception survey to drive instruction and gauge effectiveness toward meeting our goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent and Teacher Surveys and Student Perception Surveys 8  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: · Staff wide Professional Learning on the Framework for Teaching · Strategic scheduling that allows for grade level teams to meet collaboratively to develop curriculum and instruction weekly as well as to collaborate on inquiry. · Outside consultants and in house support staff available for feedback and intervisitation to share promising practices and measure student and teacher growth Designed rigorous and engaging curricula Challenge: -uneven individual practice that needs to be nurtured and supported by colleagues and administration Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, select teachers will deliver a new age-appropriate social emotional/health/sexuality education curriculum to all students in Grades K-8. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Curriculum will be introduced to staff that will be delivering (classroom teachers K-4, science teachers, All Staff September 2018 Eric Havlik (principal) Teachers will begin delivering pre-November lessons All Staff Teachers will engage with a consultant during an Election Day PD All Staff Teachers will deliver post-November lessons to the students All Staff September 2018-November 2018 November 2018 Elizabeth Sussman Audrey Elias Anne Montero Eric Havlik (principal) Elizabeth Sussman Audrey Elias Anne Montero Eric Havlik (principal) Elizabeth Sussman Audrey Elias November 2018 - June 2019 Anne Montero Eric Havlik (principal) Elizabeth Sussman Audrey Elias Anne Montero 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 1  Parents will be invited to a parent meeting led by the professional consultant and teaching staff to discuss the content of the program. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Support of outside professional development staff (budget allocation) Fair Student Funding School Wellness Grant Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will have a thorough understanding and written and verbal feedback on specific supports and moves that will ensure they can attain successful implementation of the program. In the Fall of 2018, ongoing observation and written feedback in an anecdotal log between administration and teachers will outline specific goals; post observation and mid-point professional conferences reflecting on progress will be conducted (Winter 2019). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In February, administration will meet with each teacher to assess progress being made on lesson delivery. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: · A staff of highly seasoned professionals who are deeply committed to growing their practice · Clearly designated roles that capitalize on individual strengths · Highly motivated team of teachers interested in capacity building Goals to improve effective school leadership: work closely with targeted teachers to support the growth in checking for understanding and applying differentiated strategies. Challenge: Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, teachers will participate in cycles of professional development that encompass the following areas: teacher-led PD, community development/book clubs, analysis of student work/inquiry teams and interdisciplinary projects. 3 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All staff All staff All staff September 2018 September 2018 October 2018 - June 2019 October 2018 - June 2019 Eric Havlik (principal) PD Committee Eric Havlik (principal) PD Committee Eric Havlik (principal) PD Committee Eric Havlik (principal) PD Committee Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Construct a meaningful articulation plan the incorporates possible role for individuals interested in growing their practice and contributing on a larger scale to the school . Share professional development plan with staff and solicit feedback Engage in PD cycles Reflect and assess effectiveness of cycles Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will have the opportunity to provide feedback during SLT and PTO meetings and the NYC Parent survey. The PD Committee and administration will consider feedback from parents when making decisions related to the cycles. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Financial resources (budget allocation) Parent Fundraising Common Planning time (time allocation) Professional Learning opportunities (budget and time allocation) Fair Student Funding Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 4  X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Ongoing observation and feedback between administration and teachers will determine whether or not goals are being met. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By February 2019, through the use of Advance observations and the results of the intial PPO, progress checks will be made. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: · Family Friday Events for parents on ongoing basis · Classroom blogs and weekly newsletters · Curriculum Night · Family and Friends Day · School-wide Art Show · Family Read Alouds · Academic celebrations (publishing writing) Roundtables Interactive Workshops for Families Family Math Night · Ongoing communication with parents regarding academic progress and intervention in the classroom Challenge: Since we are not a community school we need to create more opportunities for parents to engage in the learning process and have a deeper understanding of how they can support their children at home. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 6  By February 2019, administer parent survey to measure the progress toward continuing to build strong family/parent/school communication through school website and blogs, and family engagement sessions like math and humanities roundtables, Family Academics Night, Interactive Family Workshops and sessions and invitations into the classrooms. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Grow the use of a new school portal for families, students and teachers. to the 4th grade (School Loop: Fall 2018) All Parents and Families September of 2018 Administration Media Literacy Team June 2019 Initiate school-wide portfolio sharing with families All Parents and Families September of 2018 June 2019 Post Grade Level Syllabi on class websites with weekly updates by Fall 2018 All Parents and Families September of 2018 Conduct Curricular Roundtables in grades 4-7 June 2019 All Parents and Families September of 2018 June 2019 Classroom and Cluster teachers Administration Portfolio Inquiry Team, Digital Strategies Team, All Teachers Administration Media Literacy Team Classroom and Cluster teachers Administration Cluster teachers Home room teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Hold parent teacher conferences and Tuesday parent engagement meetings/phone conferences across the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 8  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds: School Loop Professional Learning (time allocation) Schedule Adjustments Planning time (time allocation and financial resources to support development of those presentations) Outside partnerships to support development of workshops Media Literacy Team support Fair student funding Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By early Winter, administer a DYO Parent Survey (hard and soft copy) available for parents. (January 2019) and Student surveys reflecting on roundtable participation and reflections on learning. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Review survey results and revise plans to address areas where desired growth has not been achieved. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) F&P Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Guided Reading Small group during the school day Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics DYO assessments Science DYO assessments Social Studies DYO assessments At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) PPC Parent Referral Teacher Referral Small group intervention Small group intervention Small group intervention Counseling 1 to 1 Tutoring Small group 1 to 1 Tutoring Small group during the school day during the school day Small group during the school day Small Group during the school day One to One 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will support these families as needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 0 0 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  none 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. none 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 3  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 4  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Brooklyn School of Inquiry, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Brooklyn School of Inquiry will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 6  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 7  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Brooklyn School of Inquiry , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 8  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 9  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 0  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 1  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: We will meet 2-3 times weekly in the morning with students to turnkey additional ENL instruction. All ELL students (all are in K&1) will attend the early morning session, unless they are unable in which case we will meet with those students after school. The program will be from 8 until 8:30 on T, W and Th each week. We will cover phonics, reading and phonemic awareness. We will teach in English, Spanish and Russian. The two teachers are 1 certified in ENL and the other Bi-lingual. We will use Fundations. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: On Monday afternoons, we will offer ENL PD sessions and we will participate in Brooklyn South trainings offered. All K through 4 classroom teachers will receive the training. Shannon Ryan will be providing PD sessions to staff. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: We will have weekly meetings on Tuesday mornings for parents of ELLs to turnkey effective strategies to help their children at home. We will cover phonics, phonemic awareness and reading. Shannon Ryan will offer these sessions and we email and send flyers home plus include the information on the bsi686.org blog. 4 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 0 Fundations, Words Their Way, paper. Ipads, Imagine Learning, Explore the Code Educational trip: Brooklyn Cyclones on 5/30/18 0 0 Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 0 0 916  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) 11,000.00 Travel Other TOTAL 450 0 12366 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 20 School Name Brooklyn School of Inquiry Borough Brooklyn School Number 686 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Eric Havlik Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Shannon Ryan Teacher/Subject Area Marcy Mattera / Math Teacher/Subject Area Christy Stewart / ELA Related-Service Provider Lee Mastropasqua Superintendent Karina Constantino Assistant Principal Anna Moshura Coach N/A School Counselor Valerie Durandisse Parent Maryana Sigalova Parent Coordinator Christopher Minaya Field Support Center Staff Member Christine Etienne Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 566 6 Total number of ELLs 63 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 11.13%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use Fountas & Pinnell reading assessments to determine each student’s decoding skills and reasoning abilities, along with comprehension of texts. We use Fundations to identify the child’s level of phonemic awareness and develop an intervention plan specific to that student’s needs. The data provides more information in regards to students' vocabulary level, comprehension and decoding skills. The data shows that students generally have basic social language but are in need of developing academic vocabulary and visual cues to fully comprehend material. Formative assessments helps us determine our students’ academic and social-emotional development on an ongoing basis, and is well aligned with developmentally appropriate instruction. Activities are planned based on assessments to stimulate exploration and learning which provide multiple opportunities in listening, speaking, reading, and writing each day to observe emerging learning. Assessment in daily instruction helps sequence future instruction to provide the next instructional step for each child. Qualitative data used to drive instruction comes from sources such as annual state assessments, interim school 7  assessments such as running records and spelling assessments, classroom performance data such as one on one conferencing, and other relevant data. We also use EDAT (ELL Data Analysis Tool) and ELL Monthly report. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We provide and utilize high quality standards-aligned instructional resources that provide equitable access for English Learners to core curriculum and academic language in the classroom, school, and community. We provide instructional resources available to and used by students and their teachers. Students must also have equitable access to a broad range of high quality instructional resources in English and in their home languages. These resources include electronic, digital, and technological resources as well as other traditional materials. They are not only be aligned to standards, but they facilitate students’ access to the core curriculum and expand their knowledge of the world. They provide authentic models of the vast array of academic language uses. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use the Ell Data analysis tool to plan our program for ELLs using data gathered from state assessments. We also evaluate the successes and struggles based on a compilation of ongoing student work compiled in a digital portfolio which includes writing samples, reading goals, math interviews, anectdotals, etc. We use those to carefully assess their language development, evaluate how our ELL students are performing in English language skills compared to the district's goals and standards and whether our former ELL students who no longer receive English language development services continue to demonstrate English language skills that enable them to successfully handle regular coursework. We identify areas of need and work collaboratively to provide intervention strategies. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have a pupil personal committee in place consisting of an administrator, a special education teacher, a general education teacher, and a social worker that complete academic and social forms that recommend proper intervention strategies including push-in support, online technology as support and a response to intervention plan that the teacher can implement in class. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Based on the results of each year’s ELA test, our school has noticed that our former ELLs have a deficiency in vernacular vocabulary and standards associated with language acquisition. For example, many former ELLs struggled with answering questions related to these standards: CCSS.ELA-Literacy.L.3.3 Use knowledge of language and its conventions when writing, speaking, reading, or listening. o CCSS.ELA-Literacy.L.3.3a Choose words and phrases for effect.* o CCSS.ELA-Literacy.L.3.3b Recognize and observe differences between the conventions of spoken and written standard English. CCSS.ELA-Literacy.L.3.4a Use sentence-level context as a clue to the meaning of a word or phrase. As a result of these findings, we now have a school-wide inquiry group focusing on the lowest third of this target group. We work collaboratively to provide ideas and ways for students to practice these skills. We have small group instruction that is targeting this growth in all grades. We also provide lunch clubs that focus on these practices. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. According to data provided by the EDAT, 29.2% of our students tested out of the ENL program. 9 students advanced 1 proficiency level. 15 students remained at the same proficiency level. 1 student regressed 1 proficiency level. Last year, we looked at the lowest components out of the four on NYSESLAT, which was Writing. 9 of our students preformed low in the writing modality, and we chose to focus on writing during everyday instruction. We provided more opportunities for students to participate in small group and safe environments, adjusted our literacy centers to include more phonics and writing activities, and set up more opportunities for one-on-one peer interactions. 8  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teaching staff work in grade teams to look at student work and assessments (formative and summative) across the curriculum to plan for targeted and differentiated instruction for all students, and engage in collaboratively planned professional learning to deepen their understanding of needs and plan effectively to improve outcomes. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We have the Freestanding English as a new language (ENL) program instruction in English with home language support, emphasizing English language acquisition. Students in freestanding ENL programs come from many different language backgrounds, and English may be the only common language among the students push-in model where an ENL-certified teacher collaborates with the classroom teacher to turn-key specific strategies that are targeted toward growth for our ELLs. Students are in the same class with the main population. Their classroom teacher in collaboration with the ENL certified teacher plan for small-group instruction based on student needs and content area. At times, those groups are of mixed-proficiency levels and others are homogeneous depending on the need. We offer both stand alone ENL ( to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. It is delivered by a certified ENL teacher) and Integrated ENL (to build English language skills through content area instruction. It is delivered by a dually certified teacher (ENL and a content area) or co- teaching by a certified ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher) . b. TBE program. If applicable. NA - we currently do not offer TBE program. 1. Transitional bilingual education (TBE) programs are designed so that students develop conceptual skills in their home language as they learn English. All instruction is Common Core-aligned to accelerate student achievement. c. DL program. If applicable. NA - we currently do not offer DL program. ual language programs are designed to continue developing students’ home languages, as well as English language skills, throughout schooling. In addition, English-proficient students are given the opportunity to learn a new language. Dual language programs serve both ELL students in need of English language development and monolingual English-proficient students who are interested in learning a second language. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We keep an excel spreadsheet where we outline how may minutes each child needs. This spreadsheet is used to log in delivered minutes for each child. Grades K to 8 Levels (as of 2015- 16 SY) Total # Minutes ENL Breakdown of Total # Minutes ENL Beginner / Entering 360 180 180 integrated ENL/ELA 0 9  Low Intermediate / Emerging 360 90 180 integrated ENL/ELA 90 Intermediate / Transitioning 180 0 90 integrated ENL/ELA 90 Advanced / Expanding 180 0 180 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area 0 Proficient / Commanding** 90 0 90 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area Beginning/Entering students are pulled out to receive stand alone instruction. Low intermediate/emerging, advanced/expanding, and proficient/commanding students receive service in the push in model where the ENL provider works collaboratively with the classroom teacher. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All of the instruction is delivered in English utilizing such strategies as TPR (total physical response), visuals such as vocabulary cards, supporting audio where applicable in a form of audio players and voice recorder, graphic organizers and lesson design using SIOP model. We use the following model of ENL program. - Push-in model: an ENL teacher works with ELLs in collaboration with general education classroom teachers to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. There is a common preparation time between the 2 teachers and/or prior collaborative lesson planning. Pull-out model: ENL teacher works with beginner/entering students in collaboration with the classroom teacher to provide further support in targeted areas. All content areas are taught in English using current approaches and methods. We use a hands on, visual and auditory method in order to include all 4 modalities of learning(listening,speaking, reading and writing). Language Experience Approach, Total Physical Response, Q-TEL, Culturally and Linguistically Responsive Core Instruction and CALLA are also methodologies that are used to foster language development and meet the demands of Common Core Learning Standards. . 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? If evaluation in home language is necessary based on teacher observations, arrangements are made for staff members who speak that language to assist in the evaluation process. We also use screeners throughout the year across content areas and units. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We differentiate instruction for each of the above groups by looking at students' needs and using their strengths to build on. For Newcomers in particular, we promote Oral Language Development by providing plenty of opportunities for meaningful discussions and peer to peer interactions. We design our units to build up oral language which provides students with deep, language- and content-based learning experiences with plenty of opportunities for reading, writing and meaningful discussion. We also use scaffolding for all of our ELLs such as paraphrasing, think-alouds, modeling, one on one teaching, and small groups. Our former ELLs benefit from our Guided Reading Program and previously mentioned supports. 6a. SIFE student would be given individual instruction using phonics instruction, grammar, developing listening skills along with reading and writing along with number sense and math reasoning. 6b. Students receiving services for less than 3 years would receive instruction in oral language skills, writing, reading and developing listening skills. ELLs taking ELA tests would require instruction focused mainly on reading, reading comprehension, answering questions and writing. 6c. Our plan for ELLs receiving service for 4 to 6 years would focus on vocabulary building, reading comprehension, writing 0  skills and listening skills and developing speaking skills. We also provide these children with a great deal of reading materials of different genres. ESL strategies will be used such as CALLA and Q-TEL. 6d. Our plan for long term ELLs includes receiving intervention services both in and out of the classroom. After school and weekend enrichment programs along with classroom instruction that is tailored to the students needs. The student will be provided with a variety of reading materials from different genres. We will provide strategies to develop comprehension and language acquisition. 6e. Former ELLs(in years 1 and 2 after testing proficient will receive additional ESL intervention in the classroom. These students will be given additional literacy and content area support for 2 years. They will also receive testing accommodations for 2 years. These accommodations are time and a half on all New York State tests. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs use graphic organizers, visual cues, identifying, highlighting and clarifying difficult words and passages within texts to facilitate comprehension, and more generally emphasizing vocabulary development as well as adjusting instruction (teacher vocabulary, rate of speech, sentence complexity, and expectations for student language productions) according to students’ oral English proficiency and special needs. Our school uses curricular, instructional and schedule flexibility to enable diverse ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment through Saturday School, after-school programs, small group instruction, trips, special events like Field Day, lunch time and recess. The ELL-SWD are in the same classes with the mainstream students 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our units are designed with differentiation strategies targeting ELL population, SWD population by providing multiple entry points as well as multiple assessment choices. In our school ELL-SWDs students are mainstreamed with general education students. The students are grouped homogeneously or heterogeneously for targeted areas of instruction based on various data, such as but not limited to the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT. They participate in guided reading instruction according to Fountas and Pinnell reading levels. They create projects tailored to their IEP goals. H 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our intervention plans for ELLs include RTI ( Response to intervention). Our math and literacy specialists are very active and provide small group instruction for students who need additional support. Modeling strategies are used in Math, Literacy, Science and Social Studies. Other interventions include instructing students in academic language and writing non- fiction pieces. Differentiating instruction , simplifying language, simplified reading materials, using graphic organizers and pictures are also used in targeted intervention programs. We have launched a differentiated literacy center program in lower grades K-4 as well as a school-wide Guided Reading program for our English Language Learners. We have also implemented small group "Just Right Math Games" as intervention for math. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are planning on improving our vocabulary program and making it part of daily instruction in every content area. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NA 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 1  All students are welcome to join in any activities that the school provides. The classroom teachers, ELL teacher, Administration and Parent Coordinator send translated letters home telling parents about the programs and calling parents to encourage them to send their children to these programs. Signs are posted outside the school as well. We offer Xposure after-school program and Wingspan Arts. All students can join a vast selection of classes to target their interests and needs. We also offer Mixed Sports and Mixed Arts program during the day where students make class selections based on their interests. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Currently, we are using the Wilson program Fundations, Context for Learning Math, Words Their Way and in-house inquiry based writing curricular. In terms of technology, we use Smartboards, clickers, laptops, ipads, cameras, audio recorders and stereos in our everyday instruction as well as books, pictures, manipulatives and posters. Our classroom libraries have books in students' native languages, dictionaries and thesauruses. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? As a school we always ensure that students' background and native language are valued and respected. We design a lot of our morning activities to support students in feeling pride for their native language as well as build a bridge between their native language and English. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We use a tracking sheet that has grade level common core standards outlined and have weekly planning meeting with teachers to ensure that all of the services and supports are delivered and correspond to ELL's ages and grade levels. We adjust our units and lessons where necessary. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The school secretary reaches out to the parents of our ELLs to welcome to the school and answer any lingering questions. The secretary also creates "family buddies' and pairs families up with current school families. We also send out letter and suggested list of books to ELL families to ease the transition and assist in language development. Our parent coordinator invited families for a welcome breakfast and plans out several community events for families to attend prior to the beginning of the school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NA 2  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We have in-house professional development that is designed and delivered by our ELL and Special Ed teachers on monthly basis. We also provide weekly professional development to individual teachers during their one-on-one meetings with the ELL teacher. Off site professional development is offered to teachers offered through our district and independent contractors. ELL teachers participate in grade level planning with classroom teachers, as well as curriculum planning staff development with outside consultants. ELL Teacher attends PD series offered. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 is dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours are dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Weekly rotational PD takes place on Monday and Tuesday from 2:50pm to 3:45pm. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We provide one on one meetings with the ELL teacher as well as off site trainings and PD. We have a document where we map out our professional development for the year. Each category is color coded to ensure that we are providing all of the necessary PD and are in compliance with CR part 154.2. In the document we calculate frequency and amount of time spent as well as teachers' needs. We also have a committee that meets on weekly basis to ensure that we are meeting the needs and requirement of the regulations. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our school has an open line of communication and parents are invited to schedule meetings with teachers and ESL specialist as frequently as needed. Parents send in requests through emails, notes and phone calls. Teachers also reach out if they have not heard from parents for an extended period of time. We have staff members that speak many different languages. However, when we come across the language that none of our staff speaks, we call DOE translation services. Parents of ELLs are included in all school workshops including literacy, math, book clubs and social emotional workshops. Parents also participate in Families Program. All Parents are invited to "Family Friday" once a month. Parents are encouraged to read in their native language to their child.. We have trips for ELL students and their parents to landmark sites within the city. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Teachers invite ELL parents to take part in the classroom by reading aloud in their native language as well as teaching about their customs and culture. They are also invited to visit and spend time with the class. Most of our ELL families are Russian and our Parent Coordinator is Russian and fluent in both English and Russian. Our PC and ESL teacher translate as needed for our Russian-speaking families. For other languages, we consult with Teaching Assistants and utilize the DOE language 3  services. Our PC meets with our ELL families monthly to be sure all school communications are understood by all families. She sends out surveys to families to gauge their needs. The teachers pay close attention to any potential needs of ELL parents and/or families and work with our PC to make sure that those needs are met. Additionally, through our Learning Leaders Program, we offer training to our ELL families so they can participate in all classroom activities. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Donna Taylor, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Brooklyn School of Inquriy School DBN: 20K686 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Eric Havlik Title Principal Anna Moshura Assistant Principal Christopher Minaya Parent Coordinator Shannon Ryan ENL/Bilingual Teacher Maryana Sigalova Parent Christy Stewart Teacher/Subject Area Marcy Mattera Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Val Durandisse School Counselor Karina Constantino Christine Etienne Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member ELL Coordinator N/A N/A N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 3/2/2018 3/2/2018 3/2/2018 3/2/2018 3/2/2018 3/2/2018 3/2/2018 3/2/2018 3/2/2018 3/2/2018 11/23/2016 11/23/2016 11/23/2016 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 20K686 School Name: BSI Superintendent: Karina Constant The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name }Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No ESL coordinator/teacher No Yes Shannon Ryan * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Written and oral language preference data is collected through the student registration form, home language identification survey and emergency contact card. Another step that we take is hold one on one interviews with parents during the registration process to successfully identify language preferences. We regularly review ATS and SESIS reports for accuracy. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 7  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 0.2 3.62 0.2 0 8.05 0 1 19 1 1 1 40 1 0.2 3.82 0.2 0.2 0.2 8.05 0.2 1 18 20K686 AL ALBANIAN 20K686 CH CHINESE Any 20K686 CN CANTONESE 0 20K686 FR FRENCH 20K686 NO English 20K686 HU HAUSA 1 20K686 MN MANDARIN 0 20K686 RU RUSSIAN 40 20K686 SX AMERICAN 0 SIGN LANGUAGE 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 8  N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent handbook Annually in September Staff ENL orientation packet/welcome letter Annually in September School wide annoucements/letters When Necessary Parent language service survey November/March Staff Staff Staff 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 9  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Registration June ENL parent orientation September Once per year Staff Staff Informal progress meetings with teachers Every Tuesday Parent teacher conferences November/March Curriculum night September/Once per year Staff Staff Staff 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. School loop to make automated phone calls to parents in preferred language. Billingual staff to make phone calls to parents in preferred language. 0  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. LAC attends training and turnkeys information to collegues via email. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We post all of the DOE provided translated materials in the designated locations to ensure that it is readily available. We also distribute translated DOE notices and information to parents informing them of available services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We send out translated surveys and hold informal meetings with parents and bilingual staff to gather feedback on their experiences and possible improvements that can be made on our part. At the end of every meeting we ask parents if there is anything that we can improve or adjust when it comes to the quality and availability of services. 1 
