 17K705 School Name: BROOKLYN ARTS AND SCIENCE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL Principal: SANDRA BEAUVOIR SOTO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Brooklyn Arts and Science Elementary School P.S. 705 331700010705 Pre-K – 5 School Number (DBN): 17705K 443 St. Marks Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11238 718-230-0851 Phone Number: 718-230-3108 Fax: Sandra Beauvoir Soto sbeauvo@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Sandra Beauvoir Soto Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Sarah Abodunrin Lorraine Collins Rachel Navarro N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 17K Superintendent’s Office Address: Clarence Ellis Superintendent: 1224 Park Place, Rm 130, Brooklyn, NY 11213 Cellis3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-221-4372 Phone Number: 718-221-4326 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn South Dr. Mauricierede Govia FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 415 89 th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4872 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Sandra B. Soto Sarah Abodunrin Lorraine Collins N/A N/A N/A N/A Carlos Caldart Katie Mark *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/Teacher Member/Parent   Name Ingrid Murray AnnmarieKerr-Calnick DamionTrent Rachel Navarro Stacey Guarino Curtis Phillips Sandra McClean Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/Paraprofessional Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of Brooklyn Arts and Science Elementary School (BASES) is to celebrate the unique complement of gifts and talents each child possesses and to cultivate those strengths into powerful assets that serve the student and society. Through an inquiry-based curriculum, school wide enrichment classes and talent development studios, we prepare our students to fully participate as 21st Century Global Citizens. Learning experiences are designed to develop the habits of mind that will move our students toward achieving their college and career goals.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our school is located in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, one of the most diverse neighborhoods in the city. Our school reflects this diversity. Currently the school is approximately 46% black, 28% Latino, 19% white and 4% Asian. Our Comprehensive Education Plan (CEP) goals were written in response to data collected from multiple sources. As our school grows, and as IB continues to become more popular, IB membership provides our community and prospective families with a shared understanding of what we mean by rigorous, inquiry-based instruction. For our students, it means they become more active participants in their learning through instruction that fosters curiosity and inquiry . 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Approximately 13% of our students are English language learners. Approximately 64% of students receive free or reduced lunch. Students in special education programs make up roughly 26% of the student body. 11% of our students live in shelters or transitional housing. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our instructional focus for 2018-2019 school year is feedback and revision. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 17K705 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 398 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 35 35 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 28 23 15 15 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 63.0% % Attendance Rate 56.5% % Reduced Lunch 13.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 30.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 18.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.25 0% 28% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 25.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 61% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 39 39 15 93.4% 6.0% 24.1% 46.2% 4.3% 1.3% 2 3% 1.1 13.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Quality Review Findings: 2017-2018  Area of focus: Assessment with a rating of Developing o Students received feedback that was not always actionable Inconsistency in students ability to speak to their feedback o  Area of strength: High Expectations with a rating of Well Developed  Other areas of note: Curriculum and Pedagogy both rated proficient Learning Environment Survey: 2017-2018 School's relative weakness on survey was Rigorous instruction with the school scoring a 2.97   Within the survey, academic press and discussions were the two lowest categories  Alignment with common core Math and ELA were the two strengths  89% of parents were satisfied with the level of education their students received. State Exams 2017-2018  Overall school proficiency rate for ELA was 26%  Third grade proficiency rate for ELA was 30%  Overall school proficiency rate for Math was 13% Summary: Though our teachers make an effort to align curriculum and instruction to the common core, academic press remains an area in need of improvement. Our goal for rigorous instruction focuses on increasing the percentage of our students on grade level through improving the rigor and academic demands on our students. We aim to increase the 2  number of second graders finishing the year on grade level so that by the end of third grade, we see an increase in the number of students scoring proficient. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 the students in grades 3-5 will show a 5% increase in student performance at level 3 and 4 as measured by the NYS Math exam. By June 2019 40% of students in grade 2 will be reading on or above grade level as measured by EOY Fundations assessment. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Engage in Data Wise activities when reviewing Teachers College Writing tasks during Grade level meeting. Integration of Jump curriculum in grades 3-5 build up foundational math skills and conceptual awareness. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students, Teachers, Administrators Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, coaches, teachers Teachers, Students Oct.. 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, Coaches Work closely with National Training Network consultants for math to increase rigor in math tasks and class work. Teachers, Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Instructional coaches, teachers, administrators Record and review Fundations assessments. Facilitate targeted small group guided practice 3-5 times a week for 20 minutes for students not meeting the 80% threshold on the assessments. Teachers, Students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Coaches, Administrators, Teachers Conduct workshops on management needs and scaffolds for SWD learners and ELL students. Teachers Oct. 2018- June 2019 Coaches, Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Curriculum nights, Math Night and Reading Workshops are offered throughout the school year to inform parents of what their children are expected to know and do to perform at grade level. A Parent Information Night in May gives parents preview of expectations for the following year and provides them with support materials for working with their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. District participation in Chancellor's Universal Literacy initiative, has provided us with a full time Literacy Coach in addition to our school-based Instructional Coach. 4  Teachers College Writing Program Instructional coach and Literacy Coach to work closely with staff to revise curriculum and help with implementing instructional approaches that support inquiry. Reading Rescue Intervention Program Jump Math curriculum Per session for teachers to provide parent workshops on literacy strategies Class Programs will be set up in minutes to allow more flexibility with teaching interdisciplinary units of study. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Students will take 2 Math simulations (Ready Math Practice test) to assess progress toward goal of achieving a 5% gain in test results. Results of Mock Math given in February 2019 will show a 3% improvement over the baseline given in November 2018. Teachers will log Fundations benchmark results in a central portal so that data can be monitored. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Ready New York CCLS, Fundations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Needs Assessment Data for Section 5B: OORS Data Trends: 2016-2017  136 logged incidents  62 level three infractions  28 level four and five infractions  61 total removals  8 suspensions 2017-2018  222 logged incidents  93 level three infractions  51 level four and five infractions  84 total removals  16 suspensions Learning Environment Survey: 2017-2018  50% of teachers report that students follow directions in class.  95 % of teachers report that students are safe in their classrooms.  65% of teachers report that they teach students skills to regulate their behavior. Quality Review Findings: 2017-2018  3.4 (Establishing a Culture of Learning) was rated Well Developed and an area of celebration 6  1.4 (Maintaining a Culture of Trust and Respect) was rated Proficient Summary: The number of recorded incidents rose significantly in 2017-2018. Teachers also reported that students were ill-equipped with skills to regulate their own behavior. By focusing on SEL through explicit teaching of self-monitoring and regulating skills, we hope to see a reduction in incidents reported on OORS. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there should be an improvement in overall school climate and sense of belonging as measured by a 5% reduction in OORS reports. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Use of Move this World before and after lunch to teach students explicit strategies to regulate their emotions. Students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers Establish a bi-weekly Student Support cabinet to review OORS and internal data regarding student behavior. Create and implement next steps to address SEL needs. Tier II/ Tier III students Bi-weekly Sept. 2018-June 2019 Dean, Administration Establish a schoolwide PBIS program tied to school expectations (Compass Points). All Students October 2018-June 2019 Create a Morning Meeting to review schoolwide expectations, celebrate students, and teach explicit calm down techniques through mindfulness practices. All Students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Dean, Administration Compass Points committee comprised of teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Sharing the compass points expectations with family and staff. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Social Worker, Pupil Accounting Secretary, Attendance Teacher 8  School Messenger - Communication system Student incentives Teachers -Parent outreach time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2019 OORS data will reveal a 8% decrease from 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Quality Review Findings, 2017-2018 The majority of teachers are engaged in collaborative inquiry on grade level teams, looking at student work protocols. Distributive leadership structures are in place to develop teacher leadership in a variety of roles. Teacher participation in collaborative inquiry promotes the achievement of school instructional goals and strengthens the capacity of teachers within and across teams. Teachers working on inquiry teams enhances their ability to identify student strengths and challenges and reflect on ways to enhance teaching strategies to address those needs. Our area of focus or growth continues to be within aligning assessments to curricula, use on-going assessment and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels. Learning Environment Survey, 2017-2018 100% of teachers say that they design instructional programs (for example, lesson and units) together. 100% of teachers say that they talk with one another about instruction 65% of teachers say that teachers take responsibility for improving the school 73% of teachers say that teachers are eager to try new ideas. Part 1 Our school strengths relative to this Framework element are well-developed teacher teams that engage in frequent cycles of inquiry and consistently collaborate on planning units of study. Part 2 Our school priority need that will be addressed in the goal and action plan is teachers' consistent use of math data to drive instruction. A 7 point decline of students performing at level 3 and 4 on the NYS Math exam has highlighted that mathematics is an area of need. We will continue to build teacher capacity around using data driven and standards based instruction and assessment. Teachers will continue to work on streamlining their formative and summative assessment tools through structured team meetings which include weekly data dives. Our weekly professional 0  development sessions will also include team building activities focusing on collaboration to enhance schoolwide culture and investment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams using Data Wise protocols will see a 5% increase in students scoring a level 2 and 3 in math as measured by the NYS Math exam. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher teams engage in weekly Data Dives using Data Wise protocols in addition to cycles of Intervisitation. District-wide Math Instructional initiatives are turn-keyed to Grade Leaders every month. Teachers, Students Oct. 2018-May 2019 Teachers will be trained on best practices and strategies under National Training Network Math Coaches Teachers, Students Oct 2018- May 2019 Teachers will engage in professional development with Jump Math to support roll out of the intervention program. Teachers Oct 2018- June 2018 Principal, Assistant Principal, Grade Leaders, Instructional Coordinator Principal, Assistant Principal, Grade Leaders, NTN Coaches Teachers, NTN / Jump Math Coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will host quarterly family evenings centered on parent engagement within our Math Curriculum with the goal to increase understanding of our Collaborative Teachers goal and action steps. Below is the timeline and key personnel for implementation and oversight: September 2018: On Back to School Night, we distributed to families on end of year benchmarks by grade for Mathematics / Key Personnel: Key Personnel: Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Principal January 2019: Math Game Night / Key Personnel: Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Principal March 2019: Math Testing Strategies / Key Personnel: Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Principal May 2019: STEM Night / Beam Center Collaboration Culminating Event / Key Personnel: Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Principal Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Additional preparation period provided weekly for action research related to outcomes for SWD and ELLs Weekly Double Planning Period has action research cycles embedded with protocols for looking at student work. Teachers and Paraprofessionals use parent engagement to share action research strategies and results with parents Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will see a 2.5% reduction in the students scoring far below average on the mock Math exam. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Ready NY CCLS exams Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Quality Review: Indicator 3.4 was an area of of celebration with a Well Developed rating. Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations. Findings: School leaders consistently provide training and communicate high expectations to all staff that align to five collaboratively developed and agreed upon schoolwide expectations, and they support staff in meeting those expectations. School leaders and staff effectively communicate expectations for learning to families via Feedback Matters reports, student led conferences, and a variety of parent engagement activities. Impact: Targeted professional development and clearly articulated expectations result in a culture of mutual accountability for students’ academic and social emotional learning. School leaders and staff successfully collaborate with families to help them support their children’s progress toward learning goals. Indicator 2.2 was an area of focus with a rating of Developing. Findings Across classrooms, teachers use and create rubrics that align to the curricula and have begun to provide glows and grows and recommended next steps on some tasks. The use of hand signals and teacher questioning to check for understanding is inconsistent and only some teachers have begun to use student self-assessment and reflection tools. Impact Although teachers have begun to use assessment data aligned to content based rubrics, feedback is not yet actionable for students. The inconsistent use of checks for understanding and student self-assessment limit the information gathered during instruction so that teachers rarely make effective adjustments to meet students’ learning needs. Learning Environment Survey 2017-2018 The relevant area of the Learning Environment Survey is in the category of effective leadership with an overall score of 3.49, .11 lower than the city average. 92% of teachers say that the principal encourages feedback through regular meetings with parent and teacher leaders. (Q9e) 92% of teachers say that the principal sets high standards for student learning (Q11d) and 88% of teachers say that the principal makes clear to the staff his or her expectations for meeting instructional goals. (Q11a) 4  The area of concern from the Learning Environment survey is Rigorous Instruction with an overall rating of 2.97, .69 lower than the city average. Only 50% of teachers stated that students are able to engage in effective student discussions. 60% of teachers said the students demonstrated academic press. MOTP 2017-2018 Consistent with that data is the MOTP from the Advance Portal. The lowest domain was domain 3: Student Engagement with an EOY rating of 2.51 and component 3d: Assessment was 2.37, consistent with the QR feedback. Summary: The data indicates the need to improve teacher capacity to deliver engaging lessons. Particularly by using assessment data to design standards aligned rigorous lessons and by providing actionable feedback to students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher practice will improve from an average rating in domain 3 of the Danielson Framework from 2.51 to 2.85 as measured by MOTP. . 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Staff will receive ongoing PD on standards aligned instruction including designing learning targets, and assessments that are aligned with standards. Teachers, paraprofessionals, other school staff September2018–June 2019 Staff will receive ongoing PD on effective use of assessment tools. These will include the design of standards based rubrics and checklists, conferencing strategies and systems for data collection and analysis. Teachers, paraprofessionals, other school staff September2018–June 2019 Intervisitation between schools and within the schools will be organized for teachers to share best practices around student engagement. Teachers November 2018 May. 2019 Administrators, Instructional Coordinator, grade team leaders, consultants Administrators, Instructional Coordinator, grade team leaders, consultants Administrators, Coach,Teachers, Parent Coordinator Professional learning cycle on discussion techniques to use in the classroom along with. Learning walks will also be conducted on equity of voice in class discussions. Teachers November 2018- May 2019 Administration, Coaches, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents receive a document called Feedback Matters as a means of monitoring their child's progress and being informed about strategies the student is working on. They also participate in student led conferences which showcase student agency. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per-Diem coverage for intervisitation and mentor support 6  Per session to cover additional support from coach and workshops for parents Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will have an average rating of 2.70 on component 3D. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance teacher observation data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2017-2018 School Quality Review Our school was rated "Well Developed" and "Area of Celebration" for School Culture where we establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations. Although teachers have begun to use assessment data aligned to content based rubrics, feedback is not yet actionable for students . The inconsistent use of checks for understanding and student self assessment limit the information gathered during instruction so that teachers rarely make effective adjustments to meet students’ learning needs. 2017-2018 School Quality Guide 96% of families say that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit their school. 91% of families say that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from their school 100% of teachers say that teachers at this school work closely with families to meet students' needs. 100% of teachers say that staff regularly communicate with families about how they can help students learn. 86% of families say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn 88% of families say that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs 89% of families say that their school offers a wide enough variety of courses, extracurricular activities, and services to keep their child interested in school. 1. Strengths: Our school's points of strength are within School Culture and creating a positive environment where families are valuable stakeholders. 2. Summary of Needs: Our school's priority need that will be addressed in the goal is strengthening family-teacher relationships and offering academically-based afterschool opportunities in order to increase student achievement. Our 2017-2018 State Math test scores highlight the need for improved family engagement to support student math achievement. In addition, as our teachers continue to develop their assessment practices, this area of focus affects teacher ability to communicate integral information on student progress to families regarding how to best support their child's academic progress. 8  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of providing parents with strategies to support their children with math, student performance will increase by 8% as measured by the state math exam. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Through workshops, parent meetings, and Student Led Conferences, we will inform parents of what their child should know at the end of the year; what progress they are making toward reaching that goal and specific supports they can offer to support them at home. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents grades Pre-K - 5 Sept. 2018 - May 2019 Classroom Teachers Parent Coordinator Principal Instructional coaches At Back to School Night families receive end of year benchmarks by grade for Math. Materials will be backpacked home for those who are unable to attend. Parents Sept 2018 Classroom Teachers grades Pre-K - 5 Parent Coordinator Principal Instructional coaches The school will host quarterly family evenings centered on parent and family engagement focused on math achievement. Parents Nov 2018 Classroom Teachers grades Pre-K - 5 Jan 2019 Parent Coordinator Mar 2019 Principal Trailblazers will help coordinate after school tutoring in math for our students in grades 3-5. Students Instructional coaches Teachers May 2019 November 2018- May 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Go Project Partner School 0  Trailblazers Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent coordinator Instructional coaches NTN math consultants Classroom teachers Per session pay Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of providing parents with strategies to support their children with math, student performance will increase by 4% as measured by the Mock State Exams. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYS Math exam Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Running records, NYSELAexam scores, teacher referrals Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) 1. Fundations Phonics intervention program Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) 1. Small group Monday-Friday during school day 2 . Small group 2. Guided Reading for Tier II students 3. Reading Rescue 3. One-to-one 4. One on one 5. Small Group 4. Max Scholar 5. SPIRE Mathematics BOY Math Assessments, NYSMath exam scores, teacher referrals Science Data At-Risk Social Studies Teacher Observations Data At-Risk 1. Guided Math instruction 2. Mathletics 3. Focus Math 4. Jump Math 1. Leveled Strategy group 1. Small Group Monday-Friday during school day 2. One to One 3. Small Group 4.. Small group 1. Through content area literature Monday-Friday during school day 1. Leveled Strategy group 1. Through content area literature Monday-Friday during school day 2  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher Observations Exhibiting social emotional difficulties 1. Choices 1. Small group Monday-Friday during school day 2. Socialization group 2. Small Group 3. At Risk Counseling 3. One to one 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 41 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. After school scholarships to attend Trailblazers. Uniform and Instructional materials for home and school. Reading Rescue intervention tutoring for struggling 1st graders. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Teachers are selected by hiring committee. Process includes resume screening, interview, demo lesson and second interview with Principal. Committee created rubrics and interview questions are used in the different phases of the process. Once hired, teachers attend an in-house teacher induction led by a teacher leader. They are also encouraged to attend summer PD with the rest of our staff. New teachers are assigned to grade teams with more experienced teachers who serve as teacher leaders and informal mentors. Our partnership with NTC (New Teacher Center) provides extensive training for our school based mentors to work with newly hired teachers for two years. All teachers are required to receive professional development from the International Baccalaureate organization in addition to training received by our Instructional Coach and Common Core Fellows. Teachers will all receive professional development in the areas of action research, including assessment and data analysis. They will also receive ongoing professional development on culturally responsive pedagogy. Arts teachers are encouraged to attend discipline specific PD offered by Central. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 6  Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All teachers are required to receive professional development from the International Baccalaureate organization in addition to training received by our Instructional Coach and Common Core Fellows. Teachers will all receive professional development in the areas of action research, including assessment and data analysis. They will also receive ongoing professional development on culturally responsive pedagogy. We have partnered with NTN (National Training Network) to provide professional development and coaching to our 4th and 5th grade math teachers. Teacher experts also provide colleague support in the areas of de-escalation best practices, Collaborative co-teaching, best practices in reading instruction and others. Arts teachers are encouraged to attend discipline specific PD offered by Central. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The IB Primary Years Program (PYP) inducts all teachers into an inquiry based approach to instruction. This student centered exploratory learning is well aligned with Pre-K instructional practices. Transition to Kindergarten begins in June when Pre-K students meet the teacher they will have the following year. The teacher comes to visit their class and they go to visit the Kindergarten teacher’s classroom. 7  PreK students are included in the learning of IB Attitudes, college and career behaviors that extend beyond the classroom. These attitudes like cooperation, tolerance, respect and commitment help them to acquire the school's shared values and prepare them for the independent and collaborative learning they will be expected to do in grades K-5. Parents are invited to several workshops to promote their child's independence and readiness skills. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. MOSL committee comprised of teacher selected the assessments that would be used to measure students learning as part of their evaluation. Units of study each have teacher designed pre and post assessments. These are collaboratively designed. Professional Learning this year will center around domain 3 including learning targets, task design, rubrics, and discussions. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A,5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Federal Federal 215,400 0 x 8  Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Local pending 0 2,527,568 x 5A,5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 9  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Brooklyn Arts and Science Elementary School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Brooklyn Arts & Science Elementary School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 1  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Brooklyn Arts & Science Elementary School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of 3  student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 4  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 5  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 6  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 7  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P.S. 705 Brooklyn Arts and Sciences Elementary School Celebrates the unique compliment of gifts and talents each child possesses. As a school, we cultivate those strengths into powerful assets that serve the student in society. Through a rigorous inquiry based curriculum we've developed as an IB candidate school. We equip our students to be fully active participants in local and global communities. We deeply believe that all children benefit from a rich diverse learning environment. We also believe in the power of diversity in public schools to reduce the achievement gap and promote future mobility. This year we are one of eight schools participating in the NYC DOE diversity pilot. The current diversity pilot insures a proposed 20% set aside priority for English Language Learners and children in the welfare system. As a result, we plan to continue to grow our Dual-Language program and improve our English Language Learner services for students and their families. Our current enrollment is 340 students. We serve grades Pre-K through 5. The concentration of our population is heavily weighted towards the lower grades. Ten percent of our population are English Language Learners. This accounts for approximately 41 students who are identified as English Language Learners. These students are dispersed amongst our General Education, ICT, Special Education and Dual Language classes. Half of these students are in Dual Language classes. Our expectation is, as part of this diversity pilot, our population of ELLs will grow and we would like to propose the inclusion of supplemental programs to best serve our students. Here are the programs that we would like to propose: 1) We would like to propose to provide a Saturday Academy for ELLs grades K-5, which will run in conjunction with our pre-existing Saturday Academy for grades 2-5.The goal would be to provide English Language instruction and academic support for all ELLs. Students would be grouped according to their ENL performance level. Levels would include one Entering group, 1 Emerging/Transitioning, group, and 1 Commanding group. Two teachers will be teaching this portion of the supplemental program at a per session rate. 2)There would also be a group of Native Spanish Speakers who would receive instructional support in Spanish with the use of the Estrellita RTI program. The program will run approximately 8 weeks on Saturdays from 9-12. One teacher will be teaching this portion of the program, at a per session rate. 3) Materials that will be used include the Language Power program by Teacher Created Materials. A total of six different levels will be ordered, three levels for grades K-2 and three levels for grades 3-5. These will be used to support English Language development. In order to support Native Language development ,the Estrellita RTI program will be purchased. Both of these programs will be used during the Saturday supplementary program. 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional Development will include training for the Estrellita RTI program for teachers that will be teaching the Saturday program to address the literacy needs of ESL Spanish speaking students. Topics to be covered would include reading and phonics skills. The initial training would proceed the start date of the Saturday program and would be provided by the Estrellita facilitator. Future training sessions will be provided throughout the year to follow up and insure the success of the program. Teachers attending would be paid at per session rate. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: ESL classes for parents will be provided on Saturdays, from 9-12, during the course of the student supplemental program. Additionally, we would like to offer evening ESL classes, once a week, from 6-7PM. These classes will help parents with English language acquisition, as well as foster a supportive community between the school and families.Topics would include, assistance with everyday necessary communication, such as, job applications, interview skills, and community resources. This program would run once a week, from 6-7PM, for an 8 week cycle. Two cycles would likely be provided. These classes will be provided by one of our ESL certified teachers, at a per session rate. Information about the program will be shared with parents through translated fliers, school newsletters and the school website. 0 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Per session funding for ESL certified teachers instruction Saturday School program for students and parents ESL teachers will need to be trained to use the Estrellita RTI program Estrellita RTI instructional sets will need to be purchased for use Per session funding for 4 teachers 3 hrs per week over 8 weeksPer session rate approximately $42 ~$4, 500 Estrellita RTI program professional development training ~$1,500 Estrellita RTI instructional Materials ~$900.00 for each set x 3 ~$2,500 Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A Estimated Travel Expenses for PD Provider $1, 000 Resources for Parent English Instruction Program ~$500 ~10,000 N/A Travel expenses need to be paid for Estrellita PD instructor Additional resources need to be provided for Parent English instruction classes 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 17 School Name Brooklyn Arts and Science Elementary Borough Brooklyn School Number 705 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Sandra Soto Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Lorraine Deacy, Samantha Keene Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Assistant Principal Erica Nekulak Coach Lauren Olerio School Counselor Tessa Garnes Parent Ms. Bryant Archie Parent Coordinator Kibibi Oyo Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 4 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 340 2 Total number of ELLs 33 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.71%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 1 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 1 1 0 1 1 3 0 1 1 4 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 4 0 0 4 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? PS 705 uses formative assessment programs TCRWP, Running Record Assessments, DIBELS, Estrellita assessments and Fountas & Pinnell assessments. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 3  PS 705 uses the results of various assessments to evaluate the program for ELLs. For grades K-2, success will be determined based on student's progress in reading levels, teacher created assessments for the content areas, and student's performance on the NYSESLAT. In addition to the aforementioned measures of success, the results of the NYS assessments will be factored in for grades 3 and 4. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] PS 705 has collected data from the 2015 ELA and Math State Assessments, NYSESLAT, Running Records, school created assessments, and anecdotals from the 2015-2016 school year to identify students who will benefit from RTI instruction. PS 705 has purchased I-ready, an educational software and students' book program to use with the Saturday Program. Go Math curriculum includes an RTI component, that is utilized by teachers in the classroom. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Looking at the data patterns across performance levels the data reveals that students exhibit strengths in speaking and listening skills. The data also revealed that an area of weakness is writing. Reading is an area of challenge for some students. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. As per the CR Part 154.2 , students in the Freestanding ENL program, Entering and Emerging students receive 180 minutes of stand- alone English as a New Language service and 180 minutes of Integrated English as a New Language service. Transitioning and Expanding students receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL service and 90 minutes of either Stand-Alone ENL service or Integrated ENL in a content area. Commanding students receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL in ELA or another content area. Students in the ENL program are grouped homogeneously and heterogeneously. Groups also include students in two contiguous grade levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. 705’s Dual Language, Kindergarten through Grade 3 classes are organized in the 50-50 instructional model. Spanish and English are taught on alternating days. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 4  P.S. 705 has three Dual Language classes, Kindergarten, Grade, and Grade 3. To ensure that all students receive the mandated amount of instructional minutes, the school uses the 50/50 instructional approach. Instruction in English and Spanish is done in on alternating days. Dual language teachers use ENL methodologies to instruct the ELLs . One period each day is designated to home language instruction. During this time, other teachers push into the Dual language classes. ELLs are instructed in their home language, while the other students are instructed in English. Dual Language teachers are able to service the Entering and Emerging ELLs for the required 360 mintes/week. They are also able to service the Transitioning ,Expanding, and Commanding ELLs for the required 180 minutes/ week. P.S. 705 has one ESL teacher who services students in its Freestanding ENL program. The ENL teacher also services ELLs in another school. P.S. 705 has 50 minute periods and through a combination of the Stand-Alone and Integrated ENL models, the ENL teacher is able to service all proficiency levels for the mandated times. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. For the Freestanding ENL program model, content and standards-based curriculum is delivered in grades K-5. P.S. 705 uses a pacing calendar, aligned with the Common Core State Standards. The ENL teacher receives a copy of the curriculum and uses these materials to tailor the instruction in order to support students’ content acquisition. The ENL teacher also collaborates with classroom teachers enabling instruction to be delivered in the areas of Math, Science, Social Studies as well as ELA. In P.S. 705’s Dual Language and Freestanding ENL programs, standard based curriculum and content are delivered across the grades. P.S. 705 ascribes to learning through inquiry, employing the use of Go Math and Full Option Science System (FOSS) for instruction in math and science. For grades K-2, a balanced literacy approach is used to instruct students in Social Studies and Literacy. For grades 3-4, Expeditionary Learning is the curriculum for ELA. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? When students enter the NYCDOE school system for the first time and LAB-R eligibility has been established, the NYSITELL is then administered. Eligible students who are Spanish speakers are administered the Spanish LAB-R. In the Dual Language program, students are given formative (IDEL) and teacher made assessments in the home language. Additionally, for ELLs in grades 3-5, translated versions (Spanish) of the NYS Math assessment and Science (Grade 4) are offered to students. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status P.S. 705 has a plan of action in place in the event of Students with Interrupted/Inconsistent Formal Education (SIFE) becoming a part of our school. Students will receive the mandated amount of ENL instructional minutes as per CR Part 154.2, according to their proficiency level. Additional ENL minutes may or may not be implemented, which will be at the discretion of the school and according to the needs of the SIFE student. Content standards and curriculum will be adapted to meet the challenges of SIFE students. Since SIFE students may come to school with emotional strain (i.e. as refugees, or without many of the necessary early skills such as reading or writing which can cause frustration in students) our School Based Support team (SBST) is prepared to be a part of any specific counseling that may be necessary. We also have a number of bilingual staff members at our school who have agreed to be a part of the supportive team for SIFE students (in the case that they speak the same language). SIFE students will also be paired with another student (the “buddy system”). Buddy system students will be paired from same NL groups when possible. b. Newcomer ELLs are serviced as part of both heterogeneous and homogeneous groups. Newcomer students will work intensively on listening and speaking upon arrival into the school system in order to build a strong base of “survival English”. For the Spanish Dual Language classes, teachers assess the student’s literacy levels in the HL in order to build upon any skills Newcomer students may transfer from their HL. There is also support for Newcomers in testing grades who are expected to take the ELA exam after one year in the U.S. Support includes exposure to the format and nature of the ELA exams, opportunities to attend after school programs, and 5  building of literacy skills during content instruction. c. Developing students are supported via small-group instruction. Students who have been receiving 4-6 years of ESL services are supported using individualized instruction tailored to the students’ weakest modalities. ENL and Dual Language teachers integrate specific ENL strategies during instruction, and offer reinforcement and education to the classroom teacher on how to best serve struggling ELL students. d. Currently, there are no long-term ELLs receiving services at PS. 705. In the event that there are long- term ELLs, P.S. 705 plans to use individualized instruction tailored to the students’ weakest modalities. Along with the students who are receiving 4-6 years of service, all long-term ELL students will be invited to participate in supplemental programs. e. As per CR Part 154.2, former ELLs will receive up to two years of language support. Analysis of state ELA and Math assessments and the NYSESLAT will be used to determine what support will be given to the students. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs who are students with disabilities are supported via close communication with the IEP teachers, one-one paraprofessionals, and other service providers. Together with the ENL teacher, students’ instructional plans are discussed, reviewed, and revised when necessary. Instruction may be revised as needed for the student and instruction is differentiated in alignment with the goals and objectives reflected on the students’ IEP. ELL-SWDs receive small-group instruction with general education ELL students at the same level of English language acquisition, with use of methods, materials, and strategies that work to help all ELL students meet the standards. When necessary, materials and methods may be adjusted to meet the specific needs of ELL-SWDs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? P.S. 705 currently has ELL-SWDs in self-contained and ICT classrooms. ELL-SWDs in the self-contained classes are serviced by the ENL teacher in a heterogeneous group. ELL-SWDs in the ICT classes are pulled into a general education population for ENL instruction. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. For the Kindergarten-Grade 3 Dual Language ELLs and the Entering and Emergent ELLs in the Freestanding ENL program, literacy intervention occurs via emergent literacy instruction in both English and Spanish. The school has implemented the Reading Power Hour program. For one period each day, specialists and service providers push into all classrooms to conduct guided reading instruction. Additionally, math intervention is provided. During this time teachers push into classrooms, working with no more than 4 students in a group. Teachers use the RTI materials that accompany the Go Math curriculum. The school is also using Reading A-Z, iReady, Reading Rescue Tutors, and Spatial Temporal Math (ST Math) as intervention tools. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? P.S. 705 has expanded its Dual Language program to services students in grades 2 and 3. In the upcoming school year the Dual Language program will include grade 4. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Extracurricular activities at P.S. 705 including Wingspan Afterschool Program and Friends of Crown Heights are offered to all students, including ELLs. P.S. 705 purchased the iReady program for ELA and Math support. The school also uses ST Math for 6  math support. This is an online program that ELLs use to strengthen math skills. Finally, P.S. 705 has partnered with Reading Rescue. This is a tutoring program and ELLs are receiving one to one reading intervention services. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. P.S. 705 uses the inquiry based approach for instruction. Go Math is used for math instruction and Full Option Science System (FOSS) is used for science instruction. For social studies and literacy instruction, teachers (Grades K-2) create units based on the NYDCOE scope and sequence and develop their own materials for instructing students. For grades 3-5, social studies and literacy instruction is provided through the use of Expeditionary Learning (NYS’s ELA curriculum). The ESL teacher collaborates with the classroom teachers and uses ESL methodologies to create materials to enhance students’ comprehension of the content provided by the classroom teachers. Teachers also use Ipads, Smartboards, and computers to enhance their instruction 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? For P.S. 705’s Dual Language program, home language literacy instruction is provided one period a day, 5 days a week. Additionally, in both the Dual Language and the Freestanding ENL programs, home language is supported through the use of classroom libraries. ELLs in the 3rd-5th grade students are provided with bilingual glossaries for Math, Science, and Social Studies. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The Dual Language and ENL teachers create heterogeneously mixed groups in an age and level-appropriate manner. For example, the Entering and Emergent groups in the Freestanding ENL program may include students from different grades; however, those grades only span 2 contiguous grade levels at most. The Dual Language and ENL teachers are careful to use grade-appropriate resources and texts. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? P.S. 705 uses the inquiry based approach for instruction. Go Math is used for math instruction and Full Option Science System (FOSS) is used for science instruction. For social studies and literacy instruction, teachers (Grades K-2) create units based on the NYDCOE scope and sequence and develop their own materials for instructing students. For grades 3-5, social studies and literacy instruction is provided through the use of Expeditionary Learning (NYS’s ELA curriculum). The ESL teacher collaborates with the classroom teachers and uses ESL methodologies to create materials to enhance students’ comprehension of the content provided by the classroom teachers. Teachers also use Ipads, Smartboards, and computers to enhance their instruction 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). P.S. 705 ensures that newly enrolled ELL students and their families are prepared for the upcoming school year upon registration. Parents receive information about busing, a school supply list, and information about the school. Parents are offered a tour of the school, and participate in a meeting with the principal. The principal interviews parents and their child (children) becoming acquainted with the needs of each family. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. 7  c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? ELL and EP instruction at P.S. 705 is delivered through the Kindergarten – Grade 3 Dual Language programs. The Dual Language program at P.S. 705 uses the 50/50 model for instruction. Students are taught in each language on alternating days. Students receive integrated instruction in all content areas except for one period each day. During this period, students are separated for native language instruction. Other pedagogues push into the classes to assist in the provision of the native language instruction. Emergent literacy for the most part, is taught simultaneously. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development will include training for the Estrellita RTI program to address the literacy needs of ENL Spanish speaking students. Topics to be covered would include reading and phonics skills. The initial training would proceed the start date of the Saturday program and would be provided by the Estrellita facilitator. Future training sessions will be provided throughout the year to follow up and insure the success of the program. All teachers of ELLs, including ENL and bilingual teachers are provided the opportunity to attend professional developments offered by the NYC Department of ELLs and Student Support. The ENL and bilingual teachers attend workshops that specifically address ELLs and the Common Core Learning Standards. The teachers then “turn-key” the information to other teachers of ELLs during the school’s designated professional development time. Additionally, some of the professional development held in house will focus on helping teachers understand the implications of the CCSS and ELL instruction and will provide best practices strategies that teachers can use to make text and content accessible to ELLs and struggling students. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. P.S. 705 provides various forms of support to its staff, as they assist ELLs in their transition to middle school. The guidance counselor and parent coordinator ensures that classroom teachers, students, and parents are continuously aware of registration processes and deadlines. The ESL teachers also work with the Guidance Counselor to ensure that all ELL paperwork and cumulative components are available in their Cumulative Folder and ready for transfer to their new schools or if needed to determine promotional eligibility (in the case that the student does not meet promotional criteria according to standardized test scores.) As per CR Part 154.2, all staff will be provided with ELL specific professional development. The 15% of of required professional development for all teachers that is dedicated to language acquisition will be provided during in house professional development and off-site professional development. The same will be done to meet the minimum of 50% for bilingual educators and ENL teachers. All records will be maintained by both teachers and administration. Copies of agendas, sign-in sheets, and workshop handouts will be used to document the professional development sessions provided at P.S. 705. 8  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? As of the 2015-2016 school year, in addition to regular parent teacher conferences, P.S. 705 will hold annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs. The purpose of these meetings is to discuss the goals of the programs in which the students are placed. At these meetings, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs will be discussed. Parents will be invited to attend a face to face meeting. If parents are unable to attend, then a meeting will be held via phone calls. These meetings will take place during the parental involvement time. Additionally, meetings will be scheduled in advance to ensure the procurement of translators. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. P.S. 705 has a rich parent volunteer program. All parents, including parents of ELLs are invited to volunteer. Many parents are currently volunteering in the school’s Pre-k- K classrooms. Parents also volunteer to assist during breakfast and lunch. P.S. 705 instituted Family Fun Fridays. One Friday a month, parents are invited to visit their children's classrooms to interact with them in their learning environment. Parents are able to actively participate in their children's learning. There is also a Parent reading program where parent volunteers read with students during the school’s literacy power hour. Parents are also involved in maintaining the school’s community garden. At the end of the school year, the classes/grades that do not participate in a graduation ceremony take part in a reflection ceremony. All parents are invited to take part in this celebration. Additionally, parents are involved in the PTA . They also run the school’s bookstore. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Sandra Beauvoir Soto, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 3  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 4 
